Report Concerning Space Data System Standards
OVERVIEW OF SPACE
COMMUNICATIONS
PROTOCOLS
INFORMATIONAL REPORT
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
GREEN BOOK
April 2023
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards
OVERVIEW OF SPACE
COMMUNICATIONS
PROTOCOLS
INFORMATIONAL REPORT
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
GREEN BOOK
April 2023
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page i
April 2023
AUTHORITY
Issue:
Informational Report, Issue 4
Date:
April 2023
Location:
Washington, DC, USA
This document has been approved for publication by the Management Council of the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) and reflects the consensus of
technical panel experts from CCSDS Member Agencies. The procedure for review and
authorization of CCSDS Reports is detailed in Organization and Processes for the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS A02.1-Y-4).
This document is published and maintained by:
CCSDS Secretariat
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC, USA
Email: secretariat@mailman.ccsds.org
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page ii
April 2023
FOREWORD
This document is a CCSDS Report that contains an overview of the space communications
protocols recommended by CCSDS. A space link is a communications link between a
spacecraft and its associated ground system or between two spacecraft. A space
communications protocol is a communications protocol designed to be used over a space
link, or in a network that contains one or multiple space links.
Through the process of normal evolution, it is expected that expansion, deletion, or
modification of this document may occur. This Report is therefore subject to CCSDS
document management and change control procedures, which are defined in Organization
and Processes for the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS A02.1-Y-4).
Current versions of CCSDS documents are maintained at the CCSDS Web site:
http://www.ccsds.org/
Questions relating to the contents or status of this document should be sent to the CCSDS
Secretariat at the email address indicated on page i.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page iii
April 2023
At time of publication, the active Member and Observer Agencies of the CCSDS were:
Member Agencies
– Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI)/Italy.
– Canadian Space Agency (CSA)/Canada.
– Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES)/France.
– China National Space Administration (CNSA)/People’s Republic of China.
– Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)/Germany.
– European Space Agency (ESA)/Europe.
– Federal Space Agency (FSA)/Russian Federation.
– Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE)/Brazil.
– Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)/Japan.
– National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)/USA.
– UK Space Agency/United Kingdom.
Observer Agencies
–
Austrian Space Agency (ASA)/Austria.
–
Belgian Science Policy Office (BELSPO)/Belgium.
–
Central Research Institute of Machine Building (TsNIIMash)/Russian Federation.
–
China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General, Beijing Institute of Tracking and
Telecommunications Technology (CLTC/BITTT)/China.
–
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)/China.
–
China Academy of Space Technology (CAST)/China.
–
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO)/Australia.
–
Danish National Space Center (DNSC)/Denmark.
–
Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia Aeroespacial (DCTA)/Brazil.
–
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)/Korea.
–
European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT)/Europe.
–
European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT)/Europe.
–
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency (GISTDA)/Thailand.
–
Hellenic National Space Committee (HNSC)/Greece.
–
Hellenic Space Agency (HSA)/Greece.
–
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO)/India.
–
Institute of Space Research (IKI)/Russian Federation.
–
Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI)/Korea.
–
Ministry of Communications (MOC)/Israel.
–
Mohammed Bin Rashid Space Centre (MBRSC)/United Arab Emirates.
–
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)/Japan.
–
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/USA.
–
National Space Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NSARK)/Kazakhstan.
–
National Space Organization (NSPO)/Chinese Taipei.
–
Naval Center for Space Technology (NCST)/USA.
–
Netherlands Space Office (NSO)/The Netherlands.
–
Research Institute for Particle & Nuclear Physics (KFKI)/Hungary.
–
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)/Turkey.
–
South African National Space Agency (SANSA)/Republic of South Africa.
–
Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO)/Pakistan.
–
Swedish Space Corporation (SSC)/Sweden.
–
Swiss Space Office (SSO)/Switzerland.
–
United States Geological Survey (USGS)/USA.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page iv
April 2023
DOCUMENT CONTROL
Document
Title
Date
Status
CCSDS
130.0-G-1
Overview of Space Link Protocols,
Issue 1
June
2001
Original issue,
superseded
CCSDS
130.0-G-2
Overview of Space Communications
Protocols, Informational Report,
Issue 2
December
2007
Issue 2, superseded
CCSDS
130.0-G-3
Overview of Space Communications
Protocols, Informational Report,
Issue 3
July 2014
Issue 3, superseded
CCSDS
130.0-G-4
Overview of Space Communications
Protocols, Informational Report,
Issue 4
April 2023
Current issue
EC 1
Editorial Change 1
February
2024
Corrects page numbering
in section 4.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page v
April 2023
CONTENTS
Section
Page
1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1-1
1.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE ........................................................................................ 1-1
1.2 DOCUMENT STRUCTURE .................................................................................. 1-1
1.3 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................ 1-1
1.4 REFERENCES ........................................................................................................ 1-3
2 INTRODUCTION TO SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS ................... 2-1
2.1 HISTORY OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS .............................. 2-1
2.2 PROTOCOL LAYERS ........................................................................................... 2-3
3 MAJOR FEATURES OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS .............. 3-1
3.1 PHYSICAL LAYER ............................................................................................... 3-1
3.2 DATA LINK LAYER ............................................................................................. 3-1
3.3 NETWORK LAYER ............................................................................................... 3-9
3.4 TRANSPORT LAYER ........................................................................................... 3-9
3.5 APPLICATION LAYER ...................................................................................... 3-10
4 EXAMPLES OF PROTOCOL CONFIGURATIONS ............................................... 4-1
4.1 GENERAL .............................................................................................................. 4-1
4.2 END-TO-END DATA FORWARDING USING PACKETS
DEFINED BY CCSDS ........................................................................................... 4-2
4.3 IP OVER CCSDS FOR END-TO-END ROUTING ............................................... 4-3
4.4 BP FOR END-TO-END DATA ROUTING ........................................................... 4-5
ANNEX A ACRONYMS .................................................................................................. A-1
Figure
2-1 Space Communications Protocols Reference Model .................................................... 2-4
3-1 Relationships between Channels of the Space Data Link Protocols ............................. 3-4
4-1 Simple Space Data System Model ................................................................................ 4-1
4-2 Protocol Configuration on a Space Link When Space Packet or
Encapsulation Packet Protocol Is Used for End-to-End Forwarding ............................ 4-3
4-3 Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When Space Packet or
Encapsulation Packet Protocol Is Used for End-to-End Forwarding ............................ 4-3
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page vi
April 2023
CONTENTS (continued)
Figure
Page
4-4 Protocol Configuration on a Space Link When IP over CCSDS Is
Used for End-to-End Routing ....................................................................................... 4-4
4-5 Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When IP over
CCSDS is Used for End-to-End Routing ...................................................................... 4-5
4-6 Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When BP Is Used
for End-to-End Data Routing ........................................................................................ 4-6
Table
3-1 Identifiers of Space Data Link Protocols ...................................................................... 3-5
3-2 Summary of Services Provided by Space Data Link Protocols .................................... 3-6
3-3 Functions of Synchronization and Channel Coding Standards ..................................... 3-8
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-1
April 2023
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1
PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The purpose of this Report is to provide an architectural overview of the space
communications protocols recommended by CCSDS and to show how these protocols are
used in space mission data systems. The focus is on the recommendations within the Space
Link Services area of CCSDS, while protocols from other areas are covered to a lesser
extent.
A space link is a communications link between a spacecraft and its associated ground system
or between two spacecraft. A space communications protocol is a communications protocol
designed to be used over a space link, or in a network that contains one or multiple space
links.
This Report presents only a top-level overview of the space communications protocols and
does not contain the specification or rationale of each protocol. The specification of a space
communications protocol developed by CCSDS is contained in a CCSDS Blue Book, and its
rationale is described in a CCSDS Green Book that accompanies the Blue Book.
1.2
DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
This document is divided into four numbered sections and an annex:
a) section 1 presents the purpose and scope of this Report and lists the definitions and
references used throughout the Report;
b) section 2 provides a brief introduction to the space communications protocols;
c) section 3 presents major features of the space communications protocols;
d) section 4 shows some examples of how space communications protocols are used in
space data systems;
e) annex A lists acronyms and abbreviations used within this document.
1.3
DEFINITIONS
1.3.1 DEFINITIONS FROM OSI BASIC REFERENCE MODEL
Most of the CCSDS space communications protocols are defined using the style established
by the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Basic Reference Model (reference [2]). This
model provides a common framework for the development of standards in the field of
systems interconnection. It defines concepts and terms associated with a layered architecture
and introduces seven specific layers. The concepts and terms defined in this model are
extensively used in the Blue Books that define CCSDS space communications protocols. If
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-2
April 2023
the reader is not familiar with this model, an excellent introduction can be found in a
textbook on computer networks such as reference [3].
The following terms used in this Report are defined in reference [2]:
a) Application Layer;
b) Data Link Layer;
c) layer;
d) Network Layer;
e) Physical Layer;
f) protocol data unit;
g) service;
h) Transport Layer.
1.3.2 TERMS DEFINED IN THIS REPORT
For the purposes of this Report, the following definitions also apply.
forwarding: The act of transferring data from its source towards its destination, which may
be in space or on the ground.
octet: An 8-bit word.
Physical Channel: A stream of bits transferred over a space link (see below) in a single
direction.
routing: The process of selecting paths from origins to destinations in a network.
space link: A communications link between a spacecraft and its associated ground system or
between two spacecraft. A space link consists of one or more Physical Channels in one or
both directions.
space communications protocol: A communications protocol designed to be used over a
space link (see above), or in a network that contains one or multiple space links.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-3
April 2023
1.4
REFERENCES
The following publications are referenced in this document. At the time of publication, the
editions indicated were valid. All publications are subject to revision, and users of this
document are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of
the publications indicated below. The CCSDS Secretariat maintains a register of currently
valid CCSDS publications.
[1]
Organization and Processes for the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems.
Issue 4. CCSDS Record (Yellow Book), CCSDS A02.1-Y-4. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, April 2014.
[2]
Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference Model: The
Basic Model. 2nd ed. International Standard, ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. Geneva: ISO, 1994.
[3]
Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J. Wetherall. Computer Networks. 5th ed. Boston:
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011.
[4]
Space Packet Protocol. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
(Blue Book), CCSDS 133.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, June 2020.
[5]
TM Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 132.0-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[6]
TC Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 232.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[7]
AOS Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[8]
TM Synchronization and Channel Coding. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 131.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, April
2022.
[9]
TC Synchronization and Channel Coding. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 231.0-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
September 2017.
[10] Radio Frequency and Modulation Systems—Part 1: Earth Stations and Spacecraft.
Issue 32. Recommendations for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS
401.0-B-32. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[11] Space Communications Protocol Specification (SCPS)—Network Protocol (SCPS-NP).
Issue 1-1. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Historical), CCSDS
713.0-B-1-S. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, (May 1999) August 2010.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-4
April 2023
[12] Space Communications Protocol Specification (SCPS)—Security Protocol (SCPS-SP).
Issue 1-S. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Historical), CCSDS
713.5-B-1-S. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, (May 1999) August 2010.
[13] Space Communications Protocol Specification (SCPS)—Transport Protocol (SCPS-
TP). Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS
714.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2006.
[14] Space Communications Protocol Specification (SCPS)—File Protocol (SCPS-FP).
Issue 1-S. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Historical), CCSDS
717.0-B-1-S. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, (May 1999) August 2010.
[15] CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP). Issue 5. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 727.0-B-5. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, July 2020.
[16] Lossless Data Compression. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 121.0-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2020.
[17] Image Data Compression. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
(Blue Book), CCSDS 122.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September 2017.
[18] Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer. Issue 6. Recommendation for
Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 211.0-B-6. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, July 2020.
[19] Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and Synchronization Sublayer. Issue 3.
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 211.2-B-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2019.
[20] Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Physical Layer. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space
Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 211.1-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
December 2013.
[21] Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference Model—
Conventions for the Definition of OSI Services. International Standard, ISO/IEC
10731:1994. Geneva: ISO, 1994.
[22] J. Postel. Internet Protocol. STD 5. Reston, Virginia: ISOC, September 1981.
[23] S. Deering and R. Hinden. Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. RFC
2460. Reston, Virginia: ISOC, December 1998.
[24] J. Postel. Transmission Control Protocol. STD 7. Reston, Virginia: ISOC, September
1981.
[25] J. Postel. User Datagram Protocol. STD 6. Reston, Virginia: ISOC, August 1980.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-5
April 2023
[26] J. Postel and J. Reynolds. File Transfer Protocol (FTP). STD 9. Reston, Virginia:
ISOC, October 1985.
[27] S. Kent and K. Seo. Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol. RFC 4301. Reston,
Virginia: ISOC, December 2005.
[28] “Packet
Version
Number.”
Space
Assigned
Numbers
Authority.
https://sanaregistry.org/r/packet\_version\_number.
[29] Encapsulation Packet Protocol. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 133.1-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, May 2020.
[30] Communications Operation Procedure-1. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 232.1-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
September 2010.
[31] Space Data Link Protocols—Summary of Concept and Rationale. Issue 3. Report
Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 130.2-G-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September 2015.
[32] Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Rationale, Architecture, and Scenarios. Issue 2.
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 210.0-G-2.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, December 2013.
[33] TM Synchronization and Channel Coding—Summary of Concept and Rationale. Issue 3.
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 130.1-G-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, June 2020.
[34] TC Synchronization and Channel Coding—Summary of Concept and Rationale. Issue
3. Report Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 230.1-G-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[35] CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP)—Part 1: Introduction and Overview. Issue 4.
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 720.1-G-4.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, May 2021.
[36] Lossless Data Compression. Issue 4. Report Concerning Space Data System Standards
(Green Book), CCSDS 120.0-G-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, November 2021.
[37] The Application of Security to CCSDS Protocols. Issue 3. Report Concerning Space
Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 350.0-G-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
March 2019.
[38] Space Link Extension—Return All Frames Service Specification. Issue 4.
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 911.1-B-4.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2016.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-6
April 2023
[39] Space Link Extension—Return Channel Frames Service Specification. Issue 3.
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 911.2-B-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2016.
[40] Space Link Extension—Return Operational Control Fields Service Specification. Issue
3. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 911.5-B-3.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2016.
[41] Space
Link
Extension—Forward
CLTU
Service
Specification.
Issue
4.
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 912.1-B-4.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2016.
[42] Space Link Extension—Forward Space Packet Service Specification. Issue 3-S.
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Historical), CCSDS 912.3-B-3-S.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, (August 2016) September 2022.
[43] Space Data Link Security Protocol. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 355.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, July 2022.
[44] “Internet Protocol Extension Header.” Space Assigned Numbers Authority.
https://sanaregistry.org/r/ipe\_header.
[45] IP over CCSDS Space Links. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
(Blue Book), CCSDS 702.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September 2012.
[46] Asynchronous Message Service. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 735.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September 2011.
[47] Mission Operations—MAL Space Packet Transport Binding and Binary Encoding.
Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS
524.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2015.
[48] “Registries.” Space Assigned Numbers Authority. https://sanaregistry.org/r.
[49] Low-Complexity Lossless and Near-Lossless Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image
Compression. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book),
CCSDS 123.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, February 2019.
[50] Flexible Advanced Coding and Modulation Scheme for High Rate Telemetry
Applications. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book),
CCSDS 131.2-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, February 2023.
[51] CCSDS Space Link Protocols over ETSI DVB-S2 Standard. Issue 2. Recommendation
for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 131.3-B-2. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, April 2022.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 1-7
April 2023
[52] CCSDS Spacecraft Identification Field Code Assignment Control Procedures. Issue 7.
Recommendation for Space Data System Practices (Magenta Book), CCSDS 320.0-M-7.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, November 2017.
[53] Security Architecture for Space Data Systems. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space
Data System Practices (Magenta Book), CCSDS 351.0-M-1. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, November 2012.
[54] CCSDS Cryptographic Algorithms. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 352.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2019.
[55] Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP) for CCSDS. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space
Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 734.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
May 2015.
[56] CCSDS Bundle Protocol Specification. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 734.2-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
September 2015.
[57] Unified Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.1-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[58] Space Data Link Security Protocol—Extended Procedures. Issue 1. Recommendation
for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 355.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, February 2019.
[59] Overview of the Unified Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 1. Report Concerning Space
Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 700.1-G-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
June 2020.
[60] Space Communications Cross Support—Architecture Requirements Document. Issue 1.
Recommendation for Space Data System Practices (Magenta Book), CCSDS 901.1-M-
1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, May 2015.
[61] Spectral Preprocessing Transform for Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image
Compression. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book),
CCSDS 122.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September 2017.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-1
April 2023
2 INTRODUCTION TO SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
2.1
HISTORY OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
Traditionally, telemetry transmitted from the spacecraft was formatted with a Time Division
Multiplexing (TDM) scheme in which data items were multiplexed into a continuous stream
of fixed-length frames based on a predefined multiplexing rule. To design and implement a
data system for spacecraft, each project was forced to develop a custom system used by that
project alone, with the exception of the ground tracking network, because of the lack of
established standards in this field.
The advent of microprocessor-based spacecraft instruments and subsystems, however,
enabled telemetry systems to become more flexible and have greater throughput so that data
processed by onboard software could be transmitted efficiently.
In the early 1980s, CCSDS developed an international standard for a Packet Telemetry
protocol capable of sending processed telemetry efficiently using a variable-length data unit
called the Source Packet. Source Packets generated by various instruments and subsystems
on a spacecraft are transmitted to the ground in a stream of continuous, fixed-length Transfer
Frames. This standard has been used by many space projects enabling them to share onboard
and ground data processing equipment.
Based on a similar concept, another international standard on Telecommand was developed
by CCSDS, shortly after Packet Telemetry, for sending commands to a spacecraft with a data
unit known as the TC Packet. TC Packets destined for various instruments and subsystems
on a spacecraft are transmitted from the ground in a stream of sporadic, variable-length
Transfer Frames.
In the late 1980s, CCSDS extended the above standards to meet the requirements of the
Advanced Orbiting Systems (AOS), such as the International Space Station, and came up
with a third standard known as AOS. The AOS standard added to the Packet Telemetry
standard services for transmitting various types of online data (such as audio and video data),
and it may be used on both space-to-ground and ground-to-space links. The AOS uses the
same packet structure as the Packet Telemetry standard, but the frame format is slightly
different.
These three standards (Packet Telemetry, Telecommand, and AOS) were later restructured by
CCSDS in order to define the protocols in a more structured and unified way, and the
following standards replaced the original standards:
a) Space Packet Protocol (SPP) (reference [4]);
b) TM, TC, and AOS Space Data Link Protocols (references [5], [6], and [7],
respectively);
c) TM and TC Synchronization and Channel Coding (references [8] and [9],
respectively).
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-2
April 2023
As an international standard for the Radio Frequency (RF) signal between a spacecraft and a
ground station, CCSDS developed a standard called Radio Frequency and Modulation
Systems (reference [10]). This standard specifies the characteristics of the RF signal used to
carry Packets and Frames.
In the 1990s, CCSDS developed another set of protocols collectively known as Space
Communications Protocol Specifications (SCPS), which include SCPS Network Protocol
(SCPS-NP) (reference [11]), SCPS Security Protocol (SCPS-SP) (reference [12]), SCPS
Transport Protocol (SCPS-TP) (reference [13]), and SCPS File Protocol (SCPS-FP)
(reference [14]). The SCPS protocols are generally based on Internet protocols, but
modifications and extensions to the Internet protocols are incorporated in the design of the
SCPS protocols to meet the specific needs of space missions. CCSDS has retired all of the
SCPS protocols with the exception of SCPS-TP.
In response to the needs of space missions to transfer files to and from an onboard mass
memory, CCSDS has developed a protocol called the CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP)
(reference [15]). This protocol provides the capability to transfer files reliably and efficiently
over an unreliable protocol (for example, the Space Packet Protocol).
In July 1998, following the successes with relay experiments for Mars spacecraft, NASA
began investigating the design for a standard protocol that can provide ‘Internet-like’
services to spacecraft that may be in deep-space and/or only intermittently-connected to
Earth. A team of researchers was formed that included Dr. Vint Cerf, co-author of the
TCP/IP protocols. Today, Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) (references [55] and [56])
provides a general-purpose Network/Transport-Layer service that is logically similar to what
TCP/IP provides for the terrestrial Internet, but suitable for use in the space environment. In
addition to the basic store-and-forward internetworking service, DTN also provides efficient
reliability, security, in-order delivery, duplicate suppression, class of service (prioritization),
remote management, a ‘DVR-like’ streaming service, rate buffering, and data accounting, all
over possibly asymmetric and time-disjoint paths. Multiple applications, including file
transfer, messaging (e.g., for mission operations), and streaming audio/video, can all be
implemented on top of DTN and leverage its services to reduce risk, cost, and complexity.
CCSDS has other specifications that individually implement some aspects of the network and
transport-layer services that DTN provides, but none of them provide the flexibility or
automated data transfer that DTN does.
In the area of data compression, CCSDS has developed standards for general-purpose
lossless data compression (reference [16]), compressors specialized for compression of two-
dimensional image data (reference [17]), and three-dimensional (multispectral/hyperspectral)
images (references [49] and [61]), either to increase the science return or to reduce the
requirement for onboard memory, station contact time, and data archival volume. The first
standard provides lossless compression, guaranteeing full reconstruction of the original data
without incurring any distortion in the process. The other standards can be used to provide
lossless or lossy/near-lossless compression, in which case, quantization or other
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-3
April 2023
approximations used in the compression process may result in the inability to reproduce the
original data set without some distortion, but in return for higher compression ratios.
Recently CCSDS has developed a protocol called Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol
(references [18], [19], [20], and [32]), to be used over proximity space links. Proximity space
links are defined to be short range, bi-directional, fixed or mobile radio links, generally used to
communicate among fixed probes, landers, rovers, orbiting constellations, and orbiting relays.
This protocol defines a data link protocol (reference [18]), coding and synchronization methods
(reference [19]), and RF and modulation characteristics (reference [20]).
In addition, CCSDS in 2018 released the Unified Space Data Link Protocol (USLP)
(reference [57]). This protocol has been designed to meet the requirements of space missions
for efficient transfer of space application data of various types and characteristics over space-
to-ground, ground-to-space, or space-to-space communications links. It is envisioned that
USLP will be used as the data link layer protocol for all future robotic and crewed space
missions.
Security is of great concern to many space missions. CCSDS has published several
documents, including The Application of CCSDS Protocols to Secure Systems
(reference [37]), Security Architecture for Space Data Systems (reference [53]), CCSDS
Cryptographic Algorithms (reference [54]), the Space Data Link Security (SDLS) protocol,
and the SDLS Extended Procedures (references [43] and [58]), to provide guidance to
missions that wish to use the CCSDS space communications protocols for spacecraft control
and data handling but also require a level of security or data protection.
2.2
PROTOCOL LAYERS
2.2.1 SUMMARY
A communications protocol is usually associated with one of the seven layers defined in the
OSI Basic Reference Model (reference [2]). Although some space communications protocols
do not fit well with the OSI seven-layer model, this Report uses this model for categorizing
the space communications protocols.
The space communications protocols are defined for the following five layers of the ISO
model:
a) Physical Layer;
b) Data Link Layer;
c) Network Layer;
d) Transport Layer;
e) Application Layer.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-4
April 2023
As in most terrestrial networks, protocols of the Session and Presentation Layers of the OSI
model are rarely used over space links.
Figure 2-1 shows the space communications protocols categorized into upper layers
(Network, Transport, and Application) as well as the Physical and Data Link Layers.
BP
LTP
AMS
CFDP
LTPCLA
ENCAPCLA
TCPCLA
UDPCLA
TCP
IP
IPoC
LTP
RF/Optical
USLP
TM
TC
AOS
Prox-1
Ethernet
Wire
UDP
Physical Layer
Data Link Layer
Either Encapsulation Packet Protocol or Space Packet Protocol
Upper Layers
Space Data Link Layer Protocols
SPP
MO-MAL
Figure 2-1: Space Communications Protocols Reference Model
CCSDS does not formally define Application Program Interfaces (APIs) for the space
communications protocols, but most CCSDS standards provide abstract service definitions in
the form of primitives following the conventions established by ISO (see reference [21]). A
primitive is an abstract representation of the services provided by the protocol layer, but it
does not depend on any implementation technology. This abstract specification may be used
as a reference for developing an API.
In the following subsections, the protocols shown in figure 2-1 are briefly introduced. Major
features of these protocols will be explained in section 3.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-5
April 2023
2.2.2 PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS has an omnibus standard for the Physical Layer called the Radio Frequency and
Modulation Systems (reference [10]), to be used for space links between spacecraft and
ground stations. The Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol also contains recommendations for
the Physical Layer of proximity space links (reference [20]).
2.2.3 DATA LINK LAYER
CCSDS defines two Sublayers in the Data Link Layer of the OSI Model: the Data Link
Protocol Sublayer and the Synchronization and Channel Coding Sublayer. The Data Link
Protocol Sublayer specifies methods of transferring data units provided by the higher layer
over a point-to-point space link using data units known as Transfer Frames. The
Synchronization and Channel Coding Sublayer specifies methods of synchronization and
channel coding for transferring Transfer Frames over a space link.
CCSDS has developed several protocols for the Data Link Protocol Sublayer of the Data Link
Layer:
a) TM Space Data Link Protocol (reference [5]);
b) TC Space Data Link Protocol (reference [6]);
c) AOS Space Data Link Protocol (reference [7]);
d) Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer (reference [18]);
e) USLP (reference [57]).
The above protocols provide the capability to send data over a single space link. TM, TC,
AOS, and USLP have provisions for inserting secured user data into a frame using the SDLS
Protocol (reference [43]) and the associated SDLS Extended Procedures (reference [58]).
However, there have been no security requirements to date established for Proximity-1. The
SDLS protocol can provide security services, such as authentication and confidentiality, for
TM Transfer Frames, AOS Transfer Frames, TC Transfer Frames, or USLP Transfer Frames.
It should be noted that the use of the SDLS function within these protocols is optional. The
SDLS Extended Procedures provides Key and Security Associations management services
needed to operate an SDLS secured space link.
CCSDS has developed three standards for the Synchronization and Channel Coding Sublayer
of the Data Link Layer:
a) TM Synchronization and Channel Coding (reference [8]);
b) TC Synchronization and Channel Coding (reference [9]);
c) Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and Synchronization Layer (reference [19]);
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-6
April 2023
d) Flexible Advanced Coding and Modulation Scheme for High Rate Telemetry
Applications (reference [50]), or ‘SCCC’;
e) CCSDS Space Link Protocols over ETSI DVB-S2 Standard (reference [51]), or ‘DVB-S2’.
TM Synchronization and Channel Coding is used with the TM or AOS Space Data Link
Protocol or USLP, TC Synchronization and Channel Coding is used with the TC Space Data
Link Protocol or USLP, and the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and
Synchronization Layer is used with the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol or USLP.
The TM, TC, and AOS Space Data Link Protocols; the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol
(Data Link Layer); and USLP are called the Space Data Link Protocols in this document.
2.2.4 BETWEEN DATA LINK AND NETWORK LAYERS
Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP) provides optional reliability mechanisms on top of an
underlying (usually data link layer) communication service.
From the point of view of protocols above LTP (e.g., Bundle Protocol), the service LTP
provides is optionally reliable delivery of layer-(N+1) Protocol Data Units (PDUs) across a
link. Layer-(N+1) PDUs are encapsulated within LTP blocks, which are segmented for
transmission over data link protocols; typically, each LTP segment is encapsulated within a
single link-layer protocol data unit, that is, an Encapsulation Packet. It should be noted that
LTP segments may also be encapsulated within Space Packets. The limited size of the Space
Packet does not in itself argue against the use of Space Packets to carry DTN traffic, because
large bundles encapsulated within large LTP blocks will in most cases be segmented into
smaller LTP segments for transmission. However, the reduced overhead of the Encapsulation
Packet makes it a more bandwidth-efficient alternative to the Space Packet. For more
information, see reference [56]).
CCSDS-recognized Internet datagrams (listed in reference [44]) can also be transferred by
CCSDS Space Data Link Protocols over a space link, multiplexed or not-multiplexed, using
the shim protocol, IP over CCSDS (reference [45]).
2.2.5 NETWORK LAYER
Space communications protocols of the Network Layer provide the function of routing or
forwarding higher-layer data through the entire data system that includes both onboard and
ground subnetworks.
CCSDS recognizes two standards for interfacing at the Network Layer:
a) CCSDS-recognized Internet Protocol datagrams (listed in reference [44]);
b) The DTN architecture’s Bundle Protocol (references [55] and [56]).
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-7
April 2023
Delay Tolerant Networking is an architecture that provides automated network
communications much as the Internet architecture does, but it does so over networks
characterized by one or more of the following:
– intermittent connectivity;
– variable delays, which may be large and irregular;
– high bit error rates;
– asymmetric and simplex links.
One core element of DTN is the Bundle Protocol (BP), which serves as the network-layer
protocol in a delay-tolerant network. BP provides end-to-end network services, operating
above the data transport services provided by links or networks accessed via Convergence
Layer Adapters (CLAs),1 and forming a store-and-forward network; a BP-based network is
an ‘overlay’ network that may span multiple networks just as the Internet is an overlay
network that spans multiple subnets or local area networks. The Bundle Protocol uses the
‘native’ local protocols (at what is termed the ‘convergence layer’) for communications
within a given network. The interface between the Bundle Protocol and a specific lower-layer
protocol suite is known as a convergence layer adapter. Figure 2-1 shows within the protocol
reference model the Bundle Protocol and several optional convergence layer adapters. On the
right, two CLAs running above a transport protocol (intended to be interpreted in the context
of the Internet stack) are shown. On the left, the two CLAs running over LTP and the CLA
running on EPP/SPP are shown. (For more information, see reference [56].)
2.2.6 TRANSPORT LAYER
Space communications protocols of the Transport Layer provide users with end-to-end
transport services.
CCSDS has developed SCPS-TP (reference [13]) for the Transport Layer.
PDUs of a Transport Layer protocol are usually transferred with a protocol of the Network
Layer over a space link, but they can be transferred directly by a Space Data Link.
Transport protocols used in the Internet (such as TCP, reference [24], and UDP, reference [25])
can also be used on top of IP datagrams over CCSDS space links, reference [45]. IPSec
(reference [27]) may be used with a Transport protocol of the Internet suite to provide end-
to-end data protection capability.
1 convergence layer adapter, CLA: Adapter that sends and receives bundles on behalf of
the Bundle Protocol Adapter, that is, the Node component that offers the BP services and
executes the procedures of the Bundle Protocol.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 2-8
April 2023
2.2.7 APPLICATION LAYER
Space communications protocols of the Application Layer provide users with end-to-end
application services such as file transfer and data compression.
CCSDS has developed several protocols for the Application Layer:
a) Asynchronous Messaging Service (AMS) (reference [46]);
b) CFDP (reference [15]);
c) Lossless Data Compression (reference [16]);
d) Image Data Compression (reference [17]);
e) Multispectral & Hyperspectral Image Compression (references [49] and [61]);
f) Space Packet Protocol (reference [4]);
g) Message Abstraction Layer (MAL) Space Packet Transport Binding and Binary
Encoding (reference [47]).
AMS is an application layer protocol for end-to-end mission data system message transfer.
CFDP provides the functionality of the Application Layer (i.e., functions for file
management). The CFDP Store-and-Forward Overlay procedures provide application-
specific transfer of data across multiple link-layer hops.
Each project (or Agency) may also elect to use application-specific protocols not
recommended by CCSDS to fulfill their mission requirements in the Application Layer over
CCSDS space communications protocols.
PDUs of an Application Layer protocol are usually transferred with a protocol of the
Transport Layer over a space link, but they can be transferred directly with a protocol of the
Network Layer.
For the Space Packet Protocol, PDUs are generated and consumed by application processes
that are on a spacecraft or on the ground.
CCSDS Encapsulation Packet Protocol allows encapsulation of PDUs of CCSDS-recognized
protocols, as defined in a SANA registry (reference [48]) into Encapsulation Packets (one
PDU per Encapsulation Packet). These packets can then be transferred over a space link
using the VC/MAP Packet Service provided by CCSDS Space Data Link Protocols.
Applications protocols used in the Internet (such as FTP, reference [26]) can also be used on
top of SCPS-TP, TCP, and UDP over space links.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-1
April 2023
3 MAJOR FEATURES OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS
PROTOCOLS
3.1
PHYSICAL LAYER
The CCSDS Recommended Standard for Radio Frequency and Modulation Systems
(reference [10]) recommends the characteristics of the RF and modulation systems used for
communications over space links between spacecraft and ground stations.
The Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Physical Layer (reference [20]) also contains
recommendations for the Physical Layer of proximity space links.
3.2
DATA LINK LAYER
3.2.1 GENERAL FEATURES OF DATA LINK PROTOCOLS
CCSDS has developed four protocols for the Data Link Protocol Sublayer of the Data Link
Layer:
a) TM Space Data Link Protocol (reference [5]);
b) TC Space Data Link Protocol (reference [6]);
c) AOS Space Data Link Protocol (reference [7]);
d) USLP Data Link Layer (reference [57]);
e) Data Link Protocol Sublayer portion of Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol
(reference [18]).
These protocols (collectively known as Space Data Link Protocols) provide the capability to
transfer various types of data on space links, but their principal function is to transfer
variable-length data units known as packets.
Each packet format transferred by the Space Data Link Protocols must have a Packet Version
Number (PVN) recognized by CCSDS. These numbers are contained in SANA
(reference [28]). Packets with authorized Packet Version Numbers can be transferred by the
Space Data Link Protocols directly, but CCSDS has another mechanism to transfer PDUs of
CCSDS and non-CCSDS protocols using the Encapsulation Packet Protocol, defined in
reference [29]. With this service, packets are transferred by the Space Data Link Protocols
encapsulated in either Space Packets defined in reference [4] or Encapsulation Packets defined
in reference [29].
The TM Space Data Link Protocol is usually used for (but not limited to) sending telemetry
from a spacecraft to a ground station (i.e., on a return link). The TC Space Data Link
Protocol is usually used for (but not limited to) sending commands from a ground station to a
spacecraft (i.e., on a forward link). The AOS Space Data Link Protocol may be used on a
return link alone, or on both forward and return links if there is a need for two-way higher-
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-2
April 2023
speed communications (e.g., audio and video) between a spacecraft and the ground. The
Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol is to be used over proximity space links, for which
proximity space links are defined to be short range, bi-directional, fixed or mobile radio
links, generally used to communicate among fixed probes, landers, rovers, orbiting
constellations, and orbiting relays. The Unified Space Link Protocol can be used over space-
to-ground, ground-to-space, or space-to-space communications links by space missions. It is
envisioned that USLP may be used by future space missions in lieu of TM, TC, AOS, and
Proximity-1.
The protocol data units used by the Space Data Link Protocols are called Transfer Frames.
TM, AOS, and USLP use fixed-length Transfer Frames to facilitate robust synchronization
procedures over a noisy link; TC, Proximity-1, and USLP use variable-length Transfer
Frames to facilitate reception of variable-length messages with various latency requirements
for telecommand.
A key feature of all the Space Data Link Protocols is the concept of ‘Virtual Channels’. The
Virtual Channel facility allows one Physical Channel (a stream of bits transferred over a
space link in a single direction) to be shared among multiple higher-layer data streams, each
of which may have different service requirements. A single Physical Channel may therefore
be divided into several separate logical data channels, each known as a Virtual Channel
(VC). Each Transfer Frame transferred over a Physical Channel belongs to one of the Virtual
Channels of the Physical Channel.
All Transfer Frames with the same Master Channel ID (MCID), that is, Transfer Frame
Version Number (TFVN) + Spacecraft ID (SCID) on a Physical Channel, constitute a Master
Channel (MC). A Master Channel consists of one or more VCs. In most cases, a Physical
Channel carries only Transfer Frames of a single MCID, and the MC will be identical with
the Physical Channel. However, a Physical Channel may carry Transfer Frames with multiple
MCIDs (with the same TFVN, but different SCIDs). In such a case, the Physical Channel
consists of multiple MCs.
Both the TC Space Data Link Protocol and USLP have a function for retransmitting lost or
corrupted data to ensure delivery of data in sequence without gaps or duplication over a space
link. This function is provided by a retransmission control mechanism called the
Communications Operation Procedure-1 (COP-1), which is defined in a separate document
(reference [30]). (This function does not necessarily guarantee end-to-end complete delivery.)
Both the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol and USLP also have a similar function called
COP-P, which is defined in the Data Link Layer Recommended Standard (reference [18]).
Neither the TM Space Data Link Protocol nor the AOS Space Data Link Protocol has such a
function, so retransmission must be done by a higher-layer protocol if complete delivery of
data is required.
The TM and AOS Space Data Link Protocols, along with USLP, can be used together with
the TM Synchronization and Channel Coding Recommended Standard (reference [8]). The
TC Space Data Link Protocol, along with USLP, can be used together with the TC
Synchronization and Channel Coding Recommended Standard (reference [9]). The TM, TC,
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-3
April 2023
AOS Space Data Link Protocols and USLP can be used on top of the Recommended
Standard for Radio Frequency and Modulation Systems (reference [10]).
Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer (reference [18]) as well as USLP can be
used together with the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and Synchronization
Sublayer (reference [19]), and on top of the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Physical
Layer (reference [20]).
A summary of the concept and rationale of the TM, TC, and AOS Space Data Link Protocols
is contained in reference [31]. Similarly for Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol, that
information is contained in reference [32], and for the USLP, in reference [59].
3.2.2 IDENTIFIERS USED BY DATA LINK PROTOCOLS
The Space Data Link Protocols provide link identifiers to identify data streams. The identifier
names as well as their values reside in the Space Assigned Numbers Authority (SANA).
SANA is the registrar for all protocol registries created under CCSDS. SANA replaces the
retired Space Link Identifiers Blue Book. The CCSDS Global Spacecraft Identification Field:
Code Assignment Control Procedures Magenta Book (reference [52]) contains the
procedures governing requesting, assigning, and relinquishing CCSDS SCID field codes.
The TM, TC, AOS, and USLP Space Data Link Protocols have the following three
identifiers: TFVN, SCID, and the Virtual Channel Identifier (VCID).
The TFVN is used to distinguish among different Transfer Frames. However, different
Transfer Frames must not be multiplexed on a Physical Channel.
The concatenation of a TFVN and a SCID is known as an MCID, which is used for
identifying a spacecraft associated with a space link.
All Transfer Frames with the same MCID on a Physical Channel constitute an MC. A
Master Channel consists of one or more Virtual Channels, each of which is identified with a
VCID. In most cases, a Physical Channel carries only Transfer Frames of a single MCID,
and the Master Channel will be identical with the Physical Channel. However, a Physical
Channel may carry Transfer Frames with multiple MCIDs (with the same TFVN). In such a
case, the Physical Channel consists of multiple Master Channels. A Physical Channel is
identified with a Physical Channel Name, which is set by management and not included in
the header of Transfer Frames.
Both the TC Space Data Link Protocol and USLP uses an optional identifier, called the
Multiplexer Access Point Identifier (MAP ID), that is used to create multiple streams of data
within a Virtual Channel. All the Transfer Frames on a Virtual Channel with the same MAP ID
constitute a MAP Channel. If the MAP ID is used, a Virtual Channel consists of one or multiple
MAP Channels.
Figure 3-1 shows the relationship among the channels of TM, TC, AOS and USLP.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-4
April 2023
MAP Channel (TC or USLP; Optional):
Identified by MAP ID
Physical Channel:
Identified by Physical Channel Name
Virtual Channel (VC):
Identified by VCID
Master Channel (MC):
Identified by MCID=TFVN+SCID
Figure 3-1: Relationships between Channels of the Space Data Link Protocols
The Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer uses a triad of multiplexing
capabilities, which is incorporated for specific functionality within the link. The SCID
identifies the source or destination of Transfer Frames transported in the link connection
based upon the Source-or-Destination Identifier. The Physical Channel Identifier (PCID)
provides up to two independently multiplexed channels. The Port ID provides the means to
route user data internally (at the transceiver’s output interface) to specific logical ports, such
as applications or transport processes, or to physical ports, such as onboard buses or physical
connections (including hardware command decoders).
Table 3-1 summarizes the identifiers of the Space Data Link Protocols. The values of these
IDs are maintained by the SANA registries (reference [48]).
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-5
April 2023
Table 3-1: Identifiers of Space Data Link Protocols
Identifiers
TM Space
Data Link
Protocol
TC Space
Data Link
Protocol
AOS Space
Data Link
Protocol
Proximity-1
Space Link
Protocol—Data
Link Layer
USLP
TFVN
Version 1
Synchronous
Transfer
Frame
Version 1
Asynchronous
Transfer
Frame
Version 2 AOS
Synchronous
Transfer Frame
Version 3
Proximity-1
Transfer Frame
Version 4 USLP
Transfer Frame
SCID
0 to 1023
0 to 1023
0 to 255
0 to 1023
0 to 65535
PCID
N/A
N/A
N/A
0 to 1
N/A
VCID
0 to 7
0 to 63
0 to 63
N/A
0 to 63
MAP ID
N/A
0 to 63
N/A
N/A
0 to 15
Port Identifier
N/A
N/A
N/A
0 to 7
N/A
3.2.3 SERVICES PROVIDED BY DATA LINK PROTOCOLS
The Space Data Link Protocols provide several services to transfer a variety of data on a
space link. The most important service is a service to transfer variable-length data units
known as packets (i.e., protocol data units of protocols of the Network Layer). In addition to
this service, the Space Data Link Protocols provide services to transfer fixed- or variable-
length data units with private (non-CCSDS) formats, short fixed-length data units for
reporting on real-time functions, and bit streams.
Table 3-2 shows a summary of the services provided by the TM/TC/AOS/USLP Space Data
Link Protocols categorized by the types of data transferred by the services. For complete
definition of these services, refer to references [5], [6], [7], and [57].
NOTE – The Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer is not included in this
table because no formal service definition is given in the Recommended Standard
(references [18]).
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-6
April 2023
Table 3-2: Summary of Services Provided by Space Data Link Protocols
Type of
Service
Data Units
TM Space Data
Link Protocol
TC Space Data
Link Protocol
AOS Space Data
Link Protocol
USLP
Packets
(NOTE 1)
Virtual Channel
Packet Service
MAP Packet
Service,
VC Packet Service
Virtual Channel
Packet Service
MAP Packet
Service
Fixed-length
private data
Virtual Channel
Access Service
(None)
Virtual Channel
Access Service
MAP Access
Service
Variable-length
private data
(None)
MAP Access
Service,
VC Access
Service
(None)
MAP Access
Service
Short
fixed-
length data
VC FSH Service
(NOTE 2),
MC FSH Service,
VC OCF Service
(NOTE 3),
MC OCF Service
(None)
Insert Service,
VC OCF Service
(NOTE 3)
Insert Service,
USLP MC OCF
Service
Stream
(None)
(None)
Bitstream Service
Octet Stream
Service
Transfer
Frames
VC Frame Service,
MC Frame Service
VC Frame Service,
MC Frame Service
VC Frame Service,
MC Frame Service
VC Frame Service,
MC Frame Service
NOTES
1
Packets directly transferred by the Space Data Link Protocols must have Packet
Version Numbers authorized by CCSDS. These Packet Version Numbers are found
in reference [28]. Other PDUs of CCSDS recognized protocols can be transferred
using the Encapsulation Packet Protocol defined in reference [29].
2
FSH = Frame Secondary Header.
3
OCF = Operational Control Field.
3.2.4 SYNCHRONIZATION AND CHANNEL CODING
The standards of the Synchronization and Channel Coding Sublayer provide some additional
functions necessary for transferring Transfer Frames over space links. These functions are
delimiting/synchronizing Transfer Frames, error-correction coding/decoding, and bit transition
generation/removal. CCSDS has five standards for Synchronization and Channel Coding:
a) A set of three TM specifications:
1) TM Synchronization and Channel Coding (reference [8]),
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-7
April 2023
2) Flexible Advanced Coding and Modulation Scheme for High Rate Telemetry
Applications (reference [50]), or ‘SCCC’,
3) CCSDS Space Link Protocols over ETSI DVB-S2 Standard (reference [51]), or
‘DVB-S2’;
b) TC Synchronization and Channel Coding (reference [9]);
c) Proximity-1
Space
Link
Protocol—Coding
and
Synchronization
Sublayer
(reference [19]).
The three TM specifications define alternative synchronization and channel coding schemes
used with the TM, AOS, or USLP Space Data Link Protocol. TC Synchronization and
Channel Coding defines synchronization and channel coding schemes used with the TC or
USLP Space Data Link Protocol. Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and
Synchronization Sublayer defines synchronization and channel coding schemes used with
both the Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol or USLP.
Options a-2) and a-3) are recommended only for high rate downlink.
The various coding specifications offer to the Data Link Protocol sublayer two types of
services at the sending end:
a) for fixed-length frames provided periodically to the lower layer at sending end (see
reference [8]);
b) for variable-length frames provided intermittently to the lower layer at sending end
(see references [9] and [19]).
While the first service is always delivering validated frames at the receiving end, the latter
type of service can present two different qualities of service at the receiving end:
a) delivering NOT validated frames at receiving end (see reference [9]); or
b) delivering validated frames at receiving end (see reference [19]).
Table 3-3 summarizes the functions and schemes provided by the Synchronization and
Channel Coding standards.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-8
April 2023
Table 3-3: Functions of Synchronization and Channel Coding Standards
Functions
TM Synchronization and
Channel Coding
TC Synchronization
and Channel Coding
Proximity-1 Space
Link Protocol—
Coding and
Synchronization
Layer
Error Correction
Scheme +
Frame
Validation
(see NOTE 3)
– Convolutional Coding + FECF;
– Reed Solomon Coding;
– Concatenated Coding;
– Turbo Coding + FECF ;
– Low-Density Parity-Check
(LDPC) Coding;
– SCCC + FECF;
– DVB-S2 + FECF
– BCH Coding
– BCH Coding + FECF
– Convolutional Coding
+ Attached CRC;
– LDPC Coding +
Attached CRC;
Pseudo-
Randomization
(see NOTE 3)
Cyclic pseudo-noise
sequence\*
Cyclic pseudo-noise
sequence\*
Cyclic pseudo-noise
sequence (used
mandatorily—only for
LDPC Coding)
Frame
Synchronization
32-bit (or longer) Attached
Sync Marker (ASM) depending
on applied coding scheme
16-bit Start Sequence
24-bit ASM
NOTES
1
‘\*’ in the table denotes an optional function.
2
When a box of the table shows several options, only one option can be applied at a
given time.
3
When only an Error Correction scheme is mentioned, it means that the scheme is also
capable of validating the frame, that is, declaring it erroneous or error free. In other
cases, for TM/TC/AOS/USLP, a Frame Error Control Field is used for error
detection, while Proximity-1 uses a Cyclic Redundancy Code (CRC) attached to the
frame (but not part of the frame). The Frame Error Control Field is defined in the
Recommended Standards on the TM/TC/AOS/USLP Space Data Link Protocols, and
not in the Recommended Standards on Synchronization and Channel Coding.
4
The cyclic pseudo-noise sequence used by TM Synchronization and Channel Coding
differs from that one used for both TC Synchronization and Channel Coding and
Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and Synchronization Layer.
Summaries of concept and rationale for TM Synchronization and Channel Coding, TC
Synchronization and Channel Coding, and Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Coding and
Synchronization Layer are contained in references [33], [34], and [32], respectively.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-9
April 2023
3.3
NETWORK LAYER
3.3.1 GENERAL FEATURES OF NETWORK PROTOCOLS
Data Forwarding differs greatly from data routing, defined in reference [60] as ‘the process
of selecting paths from origins to destinations in a network’. Here, the concept of an endpoint
is global over a series of open and extensible subnetworks. Whenever routing is done across
multiple subnetworks, a network routing protocol is required, which is not in the purview of
SPP. It is essential that when one plans to route data over an open network composed of
multiple subnetworks, one uses a network protocol.
By using the Encapsulation Packet Protocol as a shim, other CCSDS-recognized Network
Protocols such as BP (references [55] and [56]) and IP can be used over space links. The data
units of network protocols can also be transferred using the Space Packet Protocol done in a
mission-specific manner using APID(s) as set by management. Over a space link, protocol
data units of the network protocols (i.e., BP, IP, or others carried through SPP or EPP) are
transferred within the Space Data Link Protocols. In particular, the Space Data Link
Protocols have the capability to carry several protocol data units of the Internet Protocol,
multiplexed or not-multiplexed, within the Encapsulation packet. IP over CCSDS
(reference [45]) specifies how CCSDS-recognized IP datagrams are transferred over the link.
3.3.2 ADDRESSING OF NETWORK PROTOCOLS
An End System Identifier, as used by IP and BP, unambiguously identifies a single end
system or a group of end systems. If it is necessary to identify both the source and
destination when using End System Identifiers, a pair of End System Identifiers must be
used. These identifiers, which either identify or map to locations in network topology, are
specified in the IP or BP PDUs, and they are used by the IP or BP routing nodes to perform
routing decisions at each step along the end-to-end path.
As already mentioned, CCSDS Encapsulation Packet Protocol allows the use of other
CCSDS recognized Network Protocols within their own end system identification notations.
CCSDS developed Delay Tolerant Networking (references [55] and [56]) as the means to
perform interoperable internetworking in space, in either disrupted or delayed end-to-end
communication environments.
3.4
TRANSPORT LAYER
CCSDS has developed SCPS-TP (reference [13]) for the Transport Layer. CFDP (reference [15])
also provides the functionality of the Transport Layer, but it provides some functions (i.e.,
functions for file management) of the Application Layer as well.
SCPS-TP supports end-to-end communications between applications and is designed to meet
the needs of a broad range of space missions. It defines extensions to TCP and incorporates
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-10
April 2023
UDP by reference. It may be used on top of the Space Packet, Encapsulation Packet, or IP
over CCSDS.
CFDP provides the functionality of the Application Layer (i.e., functions for file
management), but it also provides functions of the Transport Layer.
Transport protocols used in the Internet (such as TCP, reference [24], and UDP, reference [25])
can also be used on top of the Encapsulation packet, or IP over CCSDS space links.
IPSec (reference [27]) can be used with the Internet Protocol suite to provide end-to-end data
protection capability.
3.5
APPLICATION LAYER
CCSDS has developed several protocols for the Application Layer:
a) AMS (reference [46]);
b) CFDP (reference [15]);
c) Lossless Data Compression (reference [16]);
d) Image Data Compression (reference [17]);
e) Low-Complexity Lossless and Near-Lossless Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image
Compression (references [49]);
f) Spectral Preprocessing Transform for Multispectral & Hyperspectral Image
Compression (reference [61]);
g) Space Packet Protocol (reference [4]).
AMS implements an interoperable protocol under which the mission modules (distinct
sequential flows of application control logic, whether called processes, tasks, or threads, each
one producing and consuming mission information) may be designed without explicit
awareness of which other modules are currently operating or of where they are deployed.
CFDP is designed to meet the needs of space missions to transfer files. It is a file transfer
protocol, but it also provides services typically found in the Transport Layer, that is,
complete, in-order, and without duplicate data delivery. It can be used on top of any protocol
of the Network Layer (i.e., IP over CCSDS or DTN BP), on top of the Space Packet Protocol
(mission specific APID assignment to CFDP required) or Encapsulation Packet Protocol, or
directly on top of the CCSDS Space Data Link Protocols if a Virtual Channel, a MAP, or a
Port is assigned to CFDP. In some circumstances, it can be used on top of UDP, TCP, or
SCPS-TP. Alternatively, CFDP can be used in Unacknowledged Mode (i.e., with Transport
Layer functionality disabled) on top of DTN (BP/LTP, providing Transport Layer
functionality at the layer underlying CFDP). A summary of concept and rationale of CFDP is
contained in reference [35].
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-11
April 2023
The Lossless Data Compression standard was developed to increase the science return as
well as to reduce the requirement for onboard memory, station contact time, and data archival
volume. This standard guarantees full reconstruction of the original data without incurring
any distortion in the process. It is intended to be used together with the Space Packet
Protocol or CFDP. A summary of concept and rationale of Lossless Data Compression is
contained in reference [36].
The Image Data Compression standard was developed to establish a standard for a data
compression algorithm applied to digital image two-dimensional spatial data from payload
instruments. With this standard, quantization or other approximations used in the
compression process may result in the inability to reproduce the original data set without
some distortion. It is intended to be used together with the Space Packet Protocol, CFDP, or
the AOS Space Data Link Protocol.
Compression standards for multispectral and hyperspectral images (references [49] and [61],
respectively) exploit the three-dimensional structure of such images to provide effective
compression. Reference [49] specifies a compression approach capable of providing lossless
compression as well as near-lossless compression, in which case the error in the reconstruted
image is guaranteed to meet a user-specified maximum allowed error. Reference [61] defines
a spectral preprocessing transform to be used in conjunction with the two-dimensional image
compressor specified in reference [17].
Applications protocols used in the Internet can be used over TCP (with or without the SCPS-TP
extensions) or UDP, as long as the underlying links are sufficiently short (<1 sec) and
continuously available. Typically, an application is written to use the reliable stream-oriented
service of TCP or the unreliable datagram service of UDP, but not both. Some exceptions to
this exist, however, in which applications are written to operate over either service.
Each project (or Agency) may elect to use application-specific protocols not recommended
by CCSDS to fulfill their mission requirements in the Application Layer over CCSDS space
communications protocols.
Over a space link, protocol data units of the network protocols (i.e., DTN bundles2, IP
datagrams) are encapsulated into Encapsulation Packets via the Encapsulation Protocol
(reference [29]) and then transferred by one of the the Space Data Link Protocols.
The Space Packet Protocol was developed to transfer data (1) from a source on a spacecraft
to one or multiple destinations on the ground or on other spacecraft, or (2) from a source on
the ground to one or multiple destinations on one or multiple spacecraft. When protocol data
units of this protocol traverse the data system of a space mission (i.e., onboard networks,
onboard data handling system, ground stations, control centers), the Application Identifier
(APID) that is part of each packet is used for determining the managed data path that packet
2 bundle: A protocol data unit of the DTN Bundle Protocol.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 3-12
April 2023
will take. All decisions about how packets are to be handled and forwarded, based on this
APID, are set by management agreement and are not a formal part of the protocol. There
should be no expectation of interoperable handling of APIDs and managed data paths in a
cross support situation unless agreements have been clearly defined as to how such
forwarding is to be done. Cross support is defined in reference [60], and interested readers
should refer to it for further details.
The Space Packet Protocol provides the capability to transfer space application data over a
managed data path that involves a ground-to-space or a space-to-space communications link.
However, unlike DTN, no provisions are made in SPP for addressing the scheduled nature of
connectivity between any of the end points or intermediate links. By encapsulating the PDUs of
other CCSDS-recognized Network Protocols such as the DTN Bundle Protocol (references [55]
and [56]) or IP, one for one into an Encapsulation Packet, these Network Protocols can be used
over CCSDS space links.
The protocol data units of the Space Packet Protocol are called Space Packets, while the
protocol data units of IP are called IP datagrams. SPP and IP do not provide any Quality of
Service (QoS) mechanisms for reliable delivery, in-order delivery, or duplicate suppression.
If these functions are required, they must be implemented by a higher-layer (e.g., transport
layer) protocol.
The Space Data Link Protocols have the capability to carry several protocol data units of the
Internet Protocol, multiplexed or not multiplexed, within the Encapsulation packet. IP over
CCSDS (reference [45]) specifies how CCSDS-recognized IP datagrams are transferred over
the link.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-1
April 2023
4 EXAMPLES OF PROTOCOL CONFIGURATIONS
4.1
GENERAL
This section shows some examples of how space communications protocols of various layers
are used in space data systems.
Five examples of protocol configurations are shown in this section. There are many other
combinations of protocols that can be used in space data systems, but it is not the intention of
this Report to enumerate all possible combinations of protocols. The following examples are
selected to illustrate the basic functionality of the space communications protocols.
For each example in this section, two diagrams are shown. The first diagram shows a stack
of protocols used over a space link (i.e., a link between a spacecraft and a ground station, or
between two spacecraft).
A space data system consists of one or more onboard subnetworks, one or more space links,
and one or more ground subnetworks. In this section, however, a simple space data system
consisting of four major elements (see figure 4-1) is used to illustrate how space
communications protocols are used in an end-to-end space data system. It will be shown that
some space communications protocols are used for end-to-end communications between
onboard and ground-end systems, and some space communications protocols are used only
for communications over the space link.
Space Segment
Ground Segment
(e.g., Central
Data Handling
System of the
Spacecraft)
(e.g., Payload)
(e.g., Ground
Station)
(e.g., Ground
User)
Onboard
End
System
Onboard
Relay
System
Ground
Relay
System
Ground
End
System
Figure 4-1: Simple Space Data System Model
The primary difference among the five examples shown in this section is the selection of the
protocol used for end-to-end routing or forwarding. In a space data system, user data
traverse subnetworks (i.e., one or more onboard subnetworks, one or more space links, and
one or more ground subnetworks). One of the protocols used in a space data system provides
the capability of routing user data from a source to a destination through these subnetworks.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-2
April 2023
This functionality is called ‘end-to-end routing’ in this Report (see definitions of ‘routing’
and ‘forwarding’ in 1.3.2).
SPP is used for end-to-end data forwarding in a closed subnetwork within an A-B-A
configuration in Section 4.2.
The following protocols are used for end-to-end data routing in the following sections:
a) IP over CCSDS over the Encapsulation Packet (4.3);
b) BP that supports DTN (4.4).
NOTES
1
In the following figures, ‘Prox Space Data Link Protocol’ denotes the Proximity-1
Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer.
2
In the following figures, the Synchronization and Channel Coding standards are
omitted for simplicity reasons.
3
CCSDS is developing DTN (references [55] and [56]) as the means to internetwork in
space.
4.2
END-TO-END DATA FORWARDING USING PACKETS DEFINED BY CCSDS
In this example, the Space Packet is used for end-to-end forwarding. The Space Packet
Protocol was designed by CCSDS to meet the requirements of space missions for efficient
transfer of processed data over space links. This configuration is suited to space missions that
require the simple APID source or destination labeling and forwarding capabilities provided by
the Space Packet Protocol.
Figure 4-2 shows an example of protocol configuration on a space link, and figure 4-3 shows
an example of protocol configuration in an end-to-end space data system. At each
intermediate system, some mechanism, not specified in SPP, examines the APID and
forwards the data to the next node that it has been instructed to use. There is no endpoint
address, and there is no specified mechanism for doing this interoperably. It is done by
management and external agreement between user and service provider.
When the Space Packet Protocol is used for end-to-end forwarding, in the ground
subnetwork, Space Packets are usually transferred with a Space Link Extension (SLE)
Service (see references [38]–[42]). Data Forwarding differs greatly from data routing,
defined in reference [60] as ‘the process of selecting managed data paths from origins to
destinations in a network’. Here, the concept of an endpoint is global over a series of open
and extensible subnetworks. Whenever we route across multiple subnetworks a network
routing protocol is required, which is not in the purview of SPP.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-3
April 2023
Space Packet or Encapsulation Packet Protocol
Lossless
Data
Compression
RF & Modulation Systems
CCSDS Space Data Link Protocols
CFDP
Application
Specific
Protocols
Figure 4-2: Protocol Configuration on a Space Link When Space Packet or
Encapsulation Packet Protocol Is Used for End-to-End Forwarding
CFDP, etc.
CFDP, etc.
Space Packet
or
Encapsulation
Space Packet
or
Encapsulation
Space Packet or
Encapsulation
Space Packet or
Encapsulation
Onboard
Subnetwork
Protocols
Onboard
Subnetwork
Protocols
Onboard End
System
Onboard Relay
System
Ground Relay
System
Ground End
System
Ground
Subnetwork
Protocols
Ground
Subnetwork
Protocols
RF &
Modula-
tion
RF &
Modula-
tion
Space
Data Link
Protocols
Space
Data Link
Protocols
Figure 4-3: Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When Space Packet or
Encapsulation Packet Protocol Is Used for End-to-End Forwarding
4.3
IP OVER CCSDS FOR END-TO-END ROUTING
In the fourth example, one of the CCSDS recognized IP datagrams defined in SANA is used
for end-to-end routing. This configuration is suited to space missions that require integration
of their space segments into the Internet when end-to-end internetworking is required and
when connectivity and Round Trip Light Time (RTLT) is suitable to support this approach.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-4
April 2023
Figure 4-4 shows an example of protocol configuration on a space link, and figure 4-5 shows
an example of protocol configuration in an end-to-end space data system.
Protocol data units (datagrams) of IP are transferred by Space Data Link Protocols using the IP
over CCSDS protocol in order for the Space Data Link Protocols to process IP datagrams
efficiently.
In this example, it is assumed that the Internet is directly extended into the space segment.
Most Internet end-to-end protocols and SCPS-TP can be used on top of IP. SCPS-TP can be
converted to TCP/UDP at a relay system.
IP over CCSDS
Encapsulation Packet
RF & Modulation Systems
CCSDS Space Data Link Protocols
Application Specific Protocols
TCP
UDP
Figure 4-4: Protocol Configuration on a Space Link When IP over CCSDS Is Used
for End-to-End Routing
At each intermediate system in an IP deployment, a routing mechanism, specified in the IP
protocol, examines the destination address and makes a routing decision that sends the data
to the next node in the route. The endpoint address is explicit, and all of the mechanisms for
doing this interoperably are fully specified. The Encapsulation Packet Protocol provides the
shim to insert the IP datagrams into a CCSDS space link and to extract it at the other end.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-5
April 2023
Applications,
etc.
Ground
Subnetwork
Protocols
IP
TCP/UDP
Applications,
etc.
Ground
Subnetwork
Protocols
RF &
Modulation
Space
Data Link
Protocols
IP
RF &
Modulation
Space
Data Link
Protocols
Onboard
Subnetwork
Protocols
IP
Onboard
Subnetwork
Protocols
IP
TCP/UDP
Onboard End
System
Onboard Relay
System
Ground Relay
System
Ground End
System
GP mtcp AASDS
Claansslariml
Paaicr
GP mtcp AASDS
Claansslariml
Paaicr
Figure 4-5: Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When IP over CCSDS is
Used for End-to-End Routing
4.4
BP FOR END-TO-END DATA ROUTING
In the final example, BP (reference [56]) is used for end-to-end data routing for the exchange
of messages (bundles) that support DTN. BP provides end-to-end network services, operating
above the data transport services provided by links or networks accessed via CLAs and
forming a store-and-forward network.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page 4-6
April 2023
CL B
CL B
Bundle
CL A
Conv. Layer A
Applications
Bundle
Bundle
Transport A
Trans A
Network A
Network A
Net A
Link A1
Link A1
Link An
Link B1
Phy A1
Phy A1
Phy An
Phy B1
Phy A2
Link A2
Link B1
Phy B1
An internet
A link-layer hop
Applications
Figure 4-6: Protocol Configuration in a Space Data System When BP Is Used for
End-to-End Data Routing
The Bundle Protocol uses the ‘native’ local protocols for communications within a given
network. The interface between the Bundle Protocol and a specific lower-layer protocol suite is
known as a convergence layer adapter. Figure 4-6 shows an example configuration with the
Bundle Protocol and a CLA running above a transport protocol (intended to be interpreted in
the context of the Internet stack) on the left, and running directly over a Data Link Layer on the
right. The ‘CL B’ on the right could, for example, be the interface to the Licklider
Transmission Protocol, with the ‘Link B1’ representing LTP running over one of the CCSDS
Data Link Layer protocols. Alternatively, BP could be used to connect together two internets
that may exist, such as an on-orbit (or lunar) network and a ground network.
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page A-1
April 2023
ANNEX A
ACRONYMS
This annex lists the acronyms and abbreviations used in this Report.
AOS
Advanced Orbiting Systems
AMS
Asynchronous Messaging Service
APID
Application Process Identifier
ASM
Attached Synchronization Marker
BCH
Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (code)
BP
Bundle Protocol
CCSDS
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems
CFDP
CCSDS File Delivery Protocol
CL
Convergence Layer
CLA
Convergence Layer Adapter
DTN
Delay Tolerant Networking
DVB-S2
Digital Video Broadcasting - Satellite - Second Generation
EPP
Encapsulation Packet Protocol
FECF
Frame Error Control Field
FSH
Frame Secondary Header
FTP
File Transfer Protocol
ID
Identifier
IP
Internet Protocol
LDPC
Low Density Parity Check (code)
LTP
Linklider Transmission Protocol
MAP
Multiplexer Access Point
MC
Master Channel
MCID
Master Channel Identifier
N/A
Not Applicable
CCSDS REPORT: OVERVIEW OF SPACE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
CCSDS 130.0-G-4
Page A-2
April 2023
OCF
Operational Control Field
PCID
Physical Channel Identifier
PDU
Protocol Data Unit
PVN
Packet Version Number
QoS
Quality of Service
RTLT
Round Trip Light Time
SANA
Space Assigned Numbers Authority
SCCC
Serial Concatenated Convolutional Code
SCID
Spacecraft Identifier
SCPS
Space Communications Protocol Standards
SCPS-FP
Space Communications Protocol Standards File Protocol
SCPS-NP
Space Communications Protocol Standards Network Protocol
SCPS-SP
Space Communications Protocol Standards Security Protocol
SCPS-TP
Space Communications Protocol Standards Transport Protocol
SDLS
Space Data Link Security (Protocol)
SLE
Space Link Extension
SPP
Space Packet Protocol
TC
Telecommand
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
TDM
Time Division Multiplexing
TFVN
Transfer Frame Version Number
TM
Telemetry
USLP
Unified Space Link Protocol
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
VC
Virtual Channel
VCID
Virtual Channel Identifier