Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
BLUE BOOK
OPTICAL
COMMUNICATIONS
PHYSICAL LAYER
RECOMMENDED STANDARD
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
August 2019
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
OPTICAL
COMMUNICATIONS
PHYSICAL LAYER
RECOMMENDED STANDARD
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
BLUE BOOK
August 2019
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page i
August 2019
AUTHORITY
Issue:
Recommended Standard, Issue 1
Date:
August 2019
Location:
Washington, DC, USA
This document has been approved for publication by the Management Council of the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) and represents the consensus
technical agreement of the participating CCSDS Member Agencies. The procedure for
review and authorization of CCSDS documents is detailed in Organization and Processes for
the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS A02.1-Y-4), and the record of
Agency participation in the authorization of this document can be obtained from the CCSDS
Secretariat at the email address below.
This document is published and maintained by:
CCSDS Secretariat
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC, USA
Email: secretariat@mailman.ccsds.org
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page ii
August 2019
STATEMENT OF INTENT
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) is an organization officially
established by the management of its members. The Committee meets periodically to address
data systems problems that are common to all participants, and to formulate sound technical
solutions to these problems. Inasmuch as participation in the CCSDS is completely
voluntary, the results of Committee actions are termed Recommended Standards and are
not considered binding on any Agency.
This Recommended Standard is issued by, and represents the consensus of, the CCSDS
members. Endorsement of this Recommendation is entirely voluntary. Endorsement,
however, indicates the following understandings:
o Whenever a member establishes a CCSDS-related standard, this standard will be in
accord with the relevant Recommended Standard. Establishing such a standard
does not preclude other provisions which a member may develop.
o Whenever a member establishes a CCSDS-related standard, that member will
provide other CCSDS members with the following information:
-- The standard itself.
-- The anticipated date of initial operational capability.
-- The anticipated duration of operational service.
o Specific service arrangements shall be made via memoranda of agreement. Neither
this Recommended Standard nor any ensuing standard is a substitute for a
memorandum of agreement.
No later than five years from its date of issuance, this Recommended Standard will be
reviewed by the CCSDS to determine whether it should: (1) remain in effect without change;
(2) be changed to reflect the impact of new technologies, new requirements, or new
directions; or (3) be retired or canceled.
In those instances when a new version of a Recommended Standard is issued, existing
CCSDS-related member standards and implementations are not negated or deemed to be
non-CCSDS compatible. It is the responsibility of each member to determine when such
standards or implementations are to be modified. Each member is, however, strongly
encouraged to direct planning for its new standards and implementations towards the later
version of the Recommended Standard.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page iii
August 2019
FOREWORD
This document is a CCSDS Recommended Standard for the Physical Layer of signals to be
used in optical communications systems of space missions. It was contributed to CCSDS by
NASA. The Physical Layer concepts described herein are intended for missions that are
cross supported between Agencies of the CCSDS.
Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the
subject of patent rights. CCSDS has processes for identifying patent issues and for securing
from the patent holder agreement that all licensing policies are reasonable and non-
discriminatory. However, CCSDS does not have a patent law staff, and CCSDS shall not be
held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.
Through the process of normal evolution, it is expected that expansion, deletion, or
modification of this document may occur. This Recommended Standard is therefore subject
to CCSDS document management and change control procedures, which are defined in
Organization and Processes for the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems
(CCSDS A02.1-Y-4). Current versions of CCSDS documents are maintained at the CCSDS
Web site:
http://www.ccsds.org/
Questions relating to the contents or status of this document should be sent to the CCSDS
Secretariat at the email address indicated on page i.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page iv
August 2019
At time of publication, the active Member and Observer Agencies of the CCSDS were:
Member Agencies
– Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI)/Italy.
– Canadian Space Agency (CSA)/Canada.
– Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES)/France.
– China National Space Administration (CNSA)/People’s Republic of China.
– Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)/Germany.
– European Space Agency (ESA)/Europe.
– Federal Space Agency (FSA)/Russian Federation.
– Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE)/Brazil.
– Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)/Japan.
– National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)/USA.
– UK Space Agency/United Kingdom.
Observer Agencies
–
Austrian Space Agency (ASA)/Austria.
–
Belgian Federal Science Policy Office (BFSPO)/Belgium.
–
Central Research Institute of Machine Building (TsNIIMash)/Russian Federation.
–
China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General, Beijing Institute of Tracking and
Telecommunications Technology (CLTC/BITTT)/China.
–
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)/China.
–
China Academy of Space Technology (CAST)/China.
–
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO)/Australia.
–
Danish National Space Center (DNSC)/Denmark.
–
Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia Aeroespacial (DCTA)/Brazil.
–
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)/Korea.
–
European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT)/Europe.
–
European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT)/Europe.
–
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency (GISTDA)/Thailand.
–
Hellenic National Space Committee (HNSC)/Greece.
–
Hellenic Space Agency (HSA)/Greece.
–
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO)/India.
–
Institute of Space Research (IKI)/Russian Federation.
–
Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI)/Korea.
–
Ministry of Communications (MOC)/Israel.
–
Mohammed Bin Rashid Space Centre (MBRSC)/United Arab Emirates.
–
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)/Japan.
–
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/USA.
–
National Space Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NSARK)/Kazakhstan.
–
National Space Organization (NSPO)/Chinese Taipei.
–
Naval Center for Space Technology (NCST)/USA.
–
Research Institute for Particle & Nuclear Physics (KFKI)/Hungary.
–
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)/Turkey.
–
South African National Space Agency (SANSA)/Republic of South Africa.
–
Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO)/Pakistan.
–
Swedish Space Corporation (SSC)/Sweden.
–
Swiss Space Office (SSO)/Switzerland.
–
United States Geological Survey (USGS)/USA.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page v
August 2019
DOCUMENT CONTROL
Document
Title
Date
Status
CCSDS
141.0-B-1
Optical Communications Physical
Layer, Recommended Standard,
Issue 1
August
2019
Original issue
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page vi
August 2019
CONTENTS
Section
Page
1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1-1
1.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................... 1-1
1.2 SCOPE .................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.3 APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................... 1-1
1.4 RATIONALE .......................................................................................................... 1-2
1.5 DOCUMENT STRUCTURE ................................................................................. 1-2
1.6 NOMENCLATURE ............................................................................................... 1-2
1.7 CONVENTIONS .................................................................................................... 1-3
1.8 REFERENCES ....................................................................................................... 1-4
2 OVERVIEW ................................................................................................................... 2-1
2.1 ARCHITECTURE .................................................................................................. 2-1
2.2 SUMMARY OF FUNCTIONS .............................................................................. 2-1
3 HPE TELEMETRY SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS ............................................... 3-1
3.1 OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................... 3-1
3.2 CENTER FREQUENCY ........................................................................................ 3-1
3.3 CENTER FREQUENCY TOLERANCE ............................................................... 3-1
3.4 LASER LINEWIDTH ............................................................................................ 3-1
3.5 IN-BAND AND SPILLOVER EMISSIONS ......................................................... 3-1
3.6 POLARIZATION ................................................................................................... 3-1
3.7 MODULATION ..................................................................................................... 3-2
3.8 TIMING JITTER .................................................................................................... 3-2
3.9 SLOT WIDTH ........................................................................................................ 3-2
3.10 PULSE REPETITION RATES .............................................................................. 3-2
4 HPE BEACON AND OPTIONAL ACCOMPANYING DATA
TRANSMISSION SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS................................................... 4-1
4.1 OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................... 4-1
4.2 CENTER FREQUENCY ........................................................................................ 4-1
4.3 CENTER FREQUENCY TOLERANCE ............................................................... 4-1
4.4 LASER LINEWIDTH ............................................................................................ 4-1
4.5 IN-BAND AND SPILLOVER EMISSIONS ......................................................... 4-1
4.6 MODULATION ..................................................................................................... 4-1
4.7 TIMING JITTER .................................................................................................... 4-2
5 MANAGED PARAMETERS ....................................................................................... 5-1
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page vii
August 2019
CONTENTS (continued)
Section
Page
ANNEX A PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION CONFORMANCE
STATEMENT PROFORMA (NORMATIVE) .......................................... A-1
ANNEX B SECURITY, SANA, AND PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
(INFORMATIVE) ..........................................................................................B-1
ANNEX C ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS (INFORMATIVE) ............................. C-1
ANNEX D INFORMATIVE REFERENCES ................................................................ D-1
Figure
1-1 Bit Numbering Convention ........................................................................................... 1-3
2-1 Relationship with OSI Layers ....................................................................................... 2-1
2-2 Overall Architecture of the Optical Communications System ..................................... 2-2
Table
5-1 Managed Parameters for HPE....................................................................................... 5-1
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 1-1
August 2019
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Recommended Standard is to specify the Physical Layer characteristics of
free-space optical communications systems used by space missions. The primary application
addressed in this issue of the Recommended Standard is space-to-ground and ground-to-space
photon starved links through an atmospheric channel; use of the Recommended Standard for
other applications or operating conditions is not precluded. When provided with a sequence of
pulsed and non-pulsed slots produced by the Coding and Synchronization sublayer (see
reference [1]), this specification describes the required Physical Layer characteristics of the
telemetry, beacon, and optional data transmission accompanying a beacon.
1.2
SCOPE
This Recommended Standard defines Physical Layer schemes in terms of the signal
characteristics and procedures involved in the physical transmission of the optical signals. It
does not specify
a) individual implementations or products;
b) the methods or technologies required to perform the procedures; or
c) the management activities required to configure and control the system.
Issue 1 of this Recommended Standard provides a specification for High Photon Efficiency
(HPE) optical communications, in which the photon-efficiency of the link is of primary
concern.1 Details of the design and implementation of HPE systems can be found in references
[D5], [D6], and [D7].
1.3
APPLICABILITY
This Recommended Standard applies to the creation of Agency standards and to the future
data communications over optical space links between CCSDS Agencies in cross-support
situations. It includes comprehensive specifications of the data formats and procedures for
inter-Agency cross support. It is neither a specification of, nor a design for, real systems that
may be implemented for existing or future missions.
The Recommended Standard specified in this document is to be invoked through the normal
standards program of each CCSDS Agency and is applicable to those missions for which
cross support based on capabilities described in this Recommended Standard is anticipated.
Where mandatory capabilities are clearly indicated in sections of this Recommended
Standard, they must be implemented when this document is used as a basis for cross support.
1 A subsequent issue of this Recommended Standard may provide a specification for optical on-off-keying and/or
high-data-rate optical communications.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 1-2
August 2019
Where options are allowed or implied, implementation of these options is subject to specific
bilateral cross support agreements between the Agencies involved.
1.4
RATIONALE
The rationale for producing this Recommended Standard is that it facilitates cross support at
the physical layer of optical communications systems used by CCSDS member agencies.
Such cross support requires specification of a set of allowable center frequencies of
transmission, along with other physical layer characteristics of the signal.
The CCSDS believes it is important to document the rationale underlying the
recommendations chosen so that future evaluations of proposed changes or improvements
will not lose sight of previous decisions. The rationale for the specifications making up this
Recommended Standard is expected to be documented in a forthcoming CCSDS
Informational Report.
1.5
DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
This document is divided into five numbered sections and four annexes:
a) section 1 presents the purpose, scope, applicability, rationale, document structure,
definitions, and references;
b) section 2 provides an overview of the architecture and summary of functions of the
Physical Layer;
c) section 3 specifies HPE telemetry signal characteristics;
d) section 4 specifies HPE beacon and optional accompanying data transmission signal
characteristics;
e) section 5 lists the managed parameters;
f) annex A is a Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS) Proforma;
g) annex B discusses security issues;
h) annex C lists acronyms used within this document;
i) annex D provides a list of informative references.
1.6
NOMENCLATURE
1.6.1 NORMATIVE TEXT
The following conventions apply throughout this Specification:
a) the words ‘shall’ and ‘must’ imply a binding and verifiable specification;
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 1-3
August 2019
b) the word ‘should’ implies an optional, but desirable, specification;
c) the word ‘may’ implies an optional specification;
d) the words ‘is’, ‘are’, and ‘will’ imply statements of fact.
1.6.2 INFORMATIVE TEXT
In the normative sections of this document, informative text is set off from the normative
specifications either in notes or under one of the following subsection headings:
– Overview;
– Background;
– Rationale;
– Discussion.
1.7
CONVENTIONS
In this document, the following convention is used to identify each bit in an N-bit field. The
first bit in the field to be transmitted (i.e., the most left justified when drawing a figure) is
defined to be ‘Bit 0’, the following bit is defined to be ‘Bit 1’, and so on up to ‘Bit N-1’.
When the field is used to express a binary value (such as a counter), the Most Significant Bit
(MSB) shall be the first transmitted bit of the field, that is, ‘Bit 0’ (see figure 1-1).
N-BIT DATA FIELD
BIT 0
BIT N-1
FIRST BIT TRANSMITTED = MSB
Figure 1-1: Bit Numbering Convention
In accordance with standard data-communications practice, data fields are often grouped into 8-
bit ‘words’ which conform to the above convention. Throughout this specification, such an 8-
bit word is called an ‘octet’. The numbering for octets within a data structure starts with ‘0’.
NOTE – Throughout this document, ‘bit’ refers to the contents of the transfer frames. A
bit is a binary digit transferred between the Data Link Protocol sublayer and the
Coding and Synchronization sublayer. Other symbols, whether binary or
nonbinary, will be referred to by other names, such as ‘binary digits’. It should be
understood that the ordering conventions described above apply equally to other
types of symbols.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 1-4
August 2019
1.8
REFERENCES
The following publications contain provisions which, through reference in this text,
constitute provisions of this document. At the time of publication, the editions indicated
were valid. All publications are subject to revision, and users of this document are
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the
publications indicated below. The CCSDS Secretariat maintains a register of currently valid
CCSDS publications.
[1]
Optical Communications Coding and Synchronization. Issue 1. Recommendation for
Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 142.0-B-1. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, August 2019.
[2]
IEEE Standard for Definitions of Terms for Antennas. Revision of IEEE Std 145-1993.
IEEE Std 145-2013. New York: IEEE, 2014.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 2-1
August 2019
2 OVERVIEW
2.1
ARCHITECTURE
Figure 2-1 illustrates the relationship of this Recommended Standard to the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) reference model (reference [D1]). Two sublayers of the Data Link
Layer are defined for CCSDS space link protocols. The Data Link Protocol sublayer provides
functions for producing Transfer Frames; possible Space Data Link Protocols using optical
communications are the TM Space Data Link Protocol (reference [D2]), the AOS Space Data
Link Protocol (reference [D3]), and the Unified Space Data Link Protocol (USLP) (reference
[D8]). The Optical Coding and Synchronization protocol (reference [1]) provides the
functions of the Coding and Synchronization sublayer of the Data Link Layer for transferring
Transfer Frames over an optical space link. The Optical Communications Physical Layer
specified in this Recommended Standard provides the required characteristics of the Physical
Layer transmission from space to ground and from ground to space.
Network and
Upper Layers
Synchronization and
Channel Coding
Sublayer
Data Link
Protocol
Sublayer
CCSDS Layers
Physical Layer
Network and
Upper Layers
OSI Layers
Physical Layer
Data Link Layer
HPE Optical
Coding &
Synchronization
TM, AOS, or USLP
Recommended
Standard Content
CCSDS Protocols
HPE Optical
Physical Layer
Figure 2-1: Relationship with OSI Layers
2.2
SUMMARY OF FUNCTIONS
The Optical Communications Physical Layer specifies the physical characteristics of the
telemetry signal and, separately, the physical characteristics of the beacon and optional
telecommand signal. In a typical application, a spacecraft transmits telemetry to a ground
station, and a ground station transmits a beacon and optional transfer frames to the
spacecraft.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 2-2
August 2019
For each of the telemetry and beacon and optional data transmission specifications, this
Recommended Standard defines the transmission laser’s required center frequency, tuning
range, linewidth, in-band and spillover emissions, polarization, modulation, pulse shape,
timing jitter, and supported slot widths.
The overall architecture of the optical communications system is shown in figure 2-2.
Throughout the communications session, the optical Terminal A transmits a beacon, together
with optional AOS or USLP transfer frames. The Terminal B receiver locks onto the beacon
and uses it to assist in accurately pointing its optical transmitter. Any AOS/USLP transfer
frames are also decoded onboard. Telemetry is transmitted from terminal B and received by
Terminal A. This Recommended Standard specifies the physical characteristics of the
Terminal A and Terminal B transmitters. In a typical application, Terminal A on the ground
transmits an uplink beacon and optional AOS/USLP transfer frames to Terminal B in space,
and Terminal B transmits a downlink telemetry signal to Terminal A.
Terminal B
Telemetry
Data
Transmitter
Transmitter
Receiver
Receiver
Beacon
and (Optional)
AOS or USLP
Transfer Frames
Terminal A
Figure 2-2: Overall Architecture of the Optical Communications System
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 3-1
August 2019
3 HPE TELEMETRY SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS
3.1
OVERVIEW
At the sending end, a binary vector is received from the Coding and Synchronization
sublayer, as defined in reference [1], indicating a sequence of slots in which light pulses are
to be present (1) or absent (0). The physical characteristics of these pulses at the sending end
are described below. At the receiving end, the Physical Layer delivers slot measurements to
the Coding and Synchronization sublayer.
3.2
CENTER FREQUENCY
The center frequency shall be 193.1 + n×0.1 THz, where n is an integer ranging from −18 to
28.
NOTE – These center frequencies in the optical C-band are a subset of those defined in the
ITU-T G.694.1 frequency grid with 100 GHz channel spacing (reference [D4]).
The frequencies range from 191.3 THz to 195.9 THz and correspond to
wavelengths in a vacuum ranging from 1530.33 nm to 1567.13 nm.
3.3
CENTER FREQUENCY TOLERANCE
The transmitter center frequency shall be accurate to within a tolerance of ± 10 GHz.
3.4
LASER LINEWIDTH
The modulated laser linewidth shall be less than 6.25 GHz, measured at full width, 1/e2 of
maximum, over a time scale of 100 ms.
3.5
IN-BAND AND SPILLOVER EMISSIONS
The laser shall transmit 95 percent of its energy within ± 10 GHz of its center frequency.
3.6
POLARIZATION
3.6.1 POLARIZATION TYPE
Polarized laser emission is optional. When polarized, the laser emission exiting the terminal
aperture shall be Right-Hand Circularly Polarized (RHCP) as defined in reference [2].
3.6.2 POLARIZATION EXTINCTION RATIO
When polarized emission is used, the polarization extinction ratio shall be greater than 10 dB.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 3-2
August 2019
3.7
MODULATION
The binary vector received from the Coding and Synchronization sublayer defined in
reference [1] shall be used to modulate the intensity of emitted light within each slot, using
On-Off Keying (OOK).
NOTE – A modulation of Pulse Position Modulation (PPM) at the Coding and
Synchronization sublayer gives rise to OOK at the Physical Layer, in the sense
that a light pulse is present or absent in each slot.
3.8
TIMING JITTER
The Root Mean Square (RMS) pulse timing jitter shall be less than 10 percent of the slot
width.
3.9
SLOT WIDTH
The slot width T shall be 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, or 512 ns.
3.10 PULSE REPETITION RATES
The laser shall support a range of Pulse Repetition Rates (PRRs) corresponding to the slot
width(s) and PPM order(s) used by the communications link.
NOTE – For example, in a system using 1 ns slots with 16-PPM and 4 slots of guard time,
pulses could be as close as 5 ns and as far apart as 35 ns, center to center,
corresponding to a PRR range of 28.57 to 200 MHz.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 4-1
August 2019
4 HPE BEACON AND OPTIONAL ACCOMPANYING DATA
TRANSMISSION SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS
4.1
OVERVIEW
At the sending end, a binary vector is received from the Coding and Synchronization
sublayer, as defined in reference [1], indicating a sequence of slots in which light pulses are
to be present (1) or absent (0). The physical characteristics of these pulses at the sending end
are described below. At the receiving end, the Physical Layer delivers slot measurements to
the Coding and Synchronization sublayer.
4.2
CENTER FREQUENCY
The center frequency shall be tunable to any frequency within ±26 GHz of 280.18 THz,
281.72 THz, or 291.06 THz.
NOTE – These center frequencies correspond to wavelengths in vacuum of 1070 nm,
1064.15 nm, and 1030 nm, respectively.
4.3
CENTER FREQUENCY TOLERANCE
The transmitter center frequency shall be accurate to within a tolerance of ±26.5 GHz.
4.4
LASER LINEWIDTH
The laser linewidth shall not exceed 53 GHz, measured at full width, 1/e2 of maximum, over
a time scale of 100 ms.
4.5
IN-BAND AND SPILLOVER EMISSIONS
The laser shall transmit 95 percent of its energy within ±50 GHz of its center frequency.
4.6
MODULATION
4.6.1 OVERVIEW
Data transmission is optional.
4.6.2 WHEN DATA TRANSMISSION IS NOT USED
When data transmission is not used, the beacon transmission shall be a 3.8145 kHz square
wave. The period of the square wave is 262,144 ns, that is, an alternating sequence of pulsed
and non-pulsed slots of duration 131,072 ns.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 4-2
August 2019
4.6.3 WHEN DATA TRANSMISSION IS USED
4.6.3.1 General
When data transmission is used, the binary vector received from the Coding and
Synchronization sublayer defined in reference [1] shall be used to modulate the intensity of
emitted light within each slot, using OOK.
NOTES
1
A modulation of PPM at the Coding and Synchronization sublayer gives rise to OOK
at the Physical Layer, in the sense that a light pulse is present or absent in each slot.
2
The transmission is not required to be polarized
4.6.3.2 Slot Widths
The slot width shall be 65,536 ns.
NOTE – This Recommended Standard can be compatible with systems using substantially
narrower pulse shapes that convey additional, higher-rate telecommand data than
is specified in this Recommended Standard. Such ‘nested outer modulations’ are
not specified by this Recommended Standard, nor are they necessarily precluded
by this Recommended Standard.
4.7
TIMING JITTER
The RMS pulse timing jitter shall be less than 10 percent of the slot width.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page 5-1
August 2019
5 MANAGED PARAMETERS
The managed parameters for HPE signaling shall be those specified in table 5-1.
Table 5-1: Managed Parameters for HPE
Managed Parameter
Allowed Values
n,
the
telemetry
signaling
center
frequency selection parameter
−18 to 28
Telemetry signaling slot width
0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
64, 128, 256, or 512 ns
Telemetry signaling polarized
transmission
Used or Not Used
Beacon frequency
280.18, 281.72, or 291.06 THz
Data transmission
Used or Not Used
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page A-1
August 2019
ANNEX A
PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION
CONFORMANCE STATEMENT PROFORMA
(NORMATIVE)
A1 INTRODUCTION
A1.1 OVERVIEW
This annex provides the Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS)
Requirements List (RL) for an implementation of Optical Communications Physical Layer,
(CCSDS 141.0-B-1). The ICS for an implementation is generated by completing the RL in
accordance with the instructions below. An implementation claiming conformance must
satisfy the mandatory requirements referenced in the RL.
The RL support column in this annex is blank. An implementation’s completed RL is called
the ICS. The ICS states which capabilities and options have been implemented. The
following can use the ICS:
– the implementer, as a checklist to reduce the risk of failure to conform to the standard
through oversight;
– a supplier or potential acquirer of the implementation, as a detailed indication of the
capabilities of the implementation, stated relative to the common basis for
understanding provided by the standard ICS proforma;
– a user or potential user of the implementation, as a basis for initially checking the
possibility of interworking with another implementation (it should be noted that,
while interworking can never be guaranteed, failure to interwork can often be
predicted from incompatible PICSes);
– a tester, as the basis for selecting appropriate tests against which to assess the claim
for conformance of the implementation.
A1.2 ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS
The RL consists of information in tabular form. The status of features is indicated using the
abbreviations and conventions described below.
Item Column
The item column contains sequential numbers for items in the table.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page A-2
August 2019
Description Column
The description column contains a brief description of the item. It implicitly means ‘Is this
item supported by the implementation?’
Reference Column
The reference column indicates the relevant subsection of Optical Communications Coding
and Synchronization, CCSDS 142.0-B-1 (this document).
Status Column
The status column uses the following notations:
M
mandatory.
O
optional.
O.i
qualified optional – for a group of related optional items labeled by the same
numeral i, it is mandatory to support at least one of the items.
C:
indicates that the status applies for the given subordinate item when
the parent item is supported, and is not applicable otherwise.
1+
One or more of the allowed values must be supported.
N/A
not applicable.
Support Column Symbols
The support column is to be used by the implementer to state whether a feature is supported
by entering Y, N, or N/A, indicating:
Y
Yes, supported by the implementation.
N
No, not supported by the implementation.
N/A Not applicable.
The support column should also be used, when appropriate, to enter values supported for a
given capability.
A1.3 INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE RL
An implementer shows the extent of compliance to the Recommended Standard by
completing the RL; that is, the state of compliance with all mandatory requirements and the
options supported are shown. The resulting completed RL is called an ICS. The implementer
shall complete the RL by entering appropriate responses in the support or values supported
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page A-3
August 2019
column, using the notation described in A1.2. If a conditional requirement is inapplicable,
N/A should be used. If a mandatory requirement is not satisfied, exception information must
be supplied by entering a reference Xi, where i is a unique identifier, to an accompanying
rationale for the noncompliance.
A2 ICS PROFORMA FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS CODING AND
SYNCHRONIZATION (CCSDS 142.0-B-1)
A2.1 GENERAL INFORMATION
A2.1.1 Identification of ICS
Date of Statement (DD/MM/YYYY)
ICS serial number
System Conformance statement cross-reference
A2.1.2 Identification of Implementation Under Test (IUT)
Implementation Name
Implementation Version
Special Configuration
Other Information
A2.1.3 Identification of Supplier
Supplier
Contact Point for Queries
Implementation Name(s) and Versions
Other information necessary for full identification,
e.g., name(s) and version(s) for machines and/or
operating systems;
System Name(s)
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page A-4
August 2019
A2.1.4 Identification of Specification
CCSDS 142.0-B-1
Have any exceptions been required?
NOTE – A YES answer means that the
implementation does not conform to the
Recommended Standard. Non-supported
mandatory capabilities are to be identified in the
ICS, with an explanation of why the
implementation is nonconforming.
Yes [ ] No [ ]
A2.1.5 Requirements list
HPE Telemetry signaling:
Item
Description
Reference
Status
Values
Allowed
Item
Supported
or Values
Supported
HPE-1
Center frequency index 3.2
1+
-18 to 28
HPE-2
Center frequency
tolerance
3.3
M
± 10 GHz
HPE-3
Laser linewidth
3.4
M
< 6.25 GHz
HPE-4
In-band and spillover
emissions
3.5
M
95% within
± 10 GHz
HPE-5
Polarized emission
3.6
O
N/A
HPE-5.1
Polarization type
3.6.1
C:M
RHCP
HPE-5.2
Polarization extinction
ratio
3.6.2
C:M
>10 dB
HPE-6
Modulation
3.7
M
OOK
HPE-7
Timing jitter
3.8
M
<10% of
slot
HPE-8
Slot width
3.9
M
0.125, 0.25,
0.5, 1, 2, 4,
8, 16, 32,
64, 128,
256, or 512
ns
HPE-9
PRRs
3.10
M
N/A
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page A-5
August 2019
HPE beacon and optional accompanying data transmission signaling:
Item
Description
Reference
Status
Values
Allowed
Item
Supported
or Values
Supported
HPE-10
Center frequency
4.2
1+
within ±26
GHz of 280.18,
281.72, 291.06
THz
HPE-11
Center frequency
tolerance
4.3
M
±26.5 GHz
HPE-12
Laser linewidth
4.4
M
53 GHz
HPE-13
In-band and spillover
emissions
4.5
M
95% within ±
50 GHz
HPE-14
Telecommand data
transmission not used
4.6.2
O.1
N/A
HPE-14.1
Beacon
4.6.2
C:M
3.8145 KHz
square wave
HPE-15
Telecommand data
transmission used
4.6.3
O.1
N/A
HPE-15.1
Slot width
4.6.3.2
C:M
65,536 ns
HPE-16
Timing jitter
4.7
M
<10% of slot
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page B-1
August 2019
ANNEX B
SECURITY, SANA, AND PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
(INFORMATIVE)
B1
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
B1.1
SECURITY BACKGROUND
It is assumed that security is provided by encryption, authentication methods, and access
control to be performed at a layer above the physical layer and coding and synchronization
sublayer. Mission and service providers are expected to select from recommended security
methods, suitable to the specific application profile. Specification of these security methods
and other security provisions is outside the scope of this Recommended Standard. The
Physical Layer has the objective of delivering data with the minimum possible amount of
residual errors. The associated channel coding as described in reference [1] must be used to
ensure that residual errors are detected and the frame flagged. There is an extremely low
probability of additional undetected errors that may escape this scrutiny. These errors may
affect the encryption process in unpredictable ways, possibly affecting the decryption stage
and producing data loss, but will not compromise the security of the data.
B1.2
SECURITY CONCERNS
Security concerns in the areas of data privacy, authentication, access control, availability of
resources, and auditing are to be addressed in higher layers and are outside the scope of this
Recommended Standard.
B1.3
CONSEQUENCES OF NOT APPLYING SECURITY
There are no specific security measures prescribed for the Physical Layer. Therefore
consequences of not applying security are only imputable to the lack of proper security
measures in other layers. Residual undetected errors may produce additional data loss when
the link carries encrypted data.
B2
SANA CONSIDERATIONS
The recommendations of this document do not require any action from SANA.
B3
PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
No patents are known to relate to this Recommended Standard.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page C-1
August 2019
ANNEX C
ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS
(INFORMATIVE)
C1 INTRODUCTION
This annex lists key abbreviations and terms that are used throughout this Recommended
Standard.
C2 ABBREVIATIONS
AOS
Advanced Orbiting Systems
HPE
high photon efficiency
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
MSB
most significant bit
OOK
on-off keying
OSI
Open Systems Interconnection
PPM
pulse position modulation
PRR
pulse repetition rate
RHCP
right-hand circular polarization
RMS
root mean square
RZ50
50-percent return-to-zero
TM
telemetry
USLP
Unified Space Data Link Protocol
C3 TERMS
center frequency: The central frequency of a laser beam occupying a range of frequencies.
laser linewidth: The spectral linewidth of a laser beam.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page C-2
August 2019
optical pulse: An emission of photons, often constrained with respect to its amplitude,
shape, and duration.
polarization extinction ratio: The ratio of optical powers of perpendicular polarization.
pulse repetition rate, PRR: The number of emitted pulses per second, or the inverse
temporal pulse spacing.
right-hand circular polarization, RHCP: A circularly polarized wave in which the electric
field vector rotates in a right-hand sense, with respect to the direction of propagation.
spillover emissions: The energy of an emission that is outside of a defined spectral band.
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS PHYSICAL LAYER
CCSDS 141.0-B-1
Page D-1
August 2019
ANNEX D
INFORMATIVE REFERENCES
[D1] Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference Model: The
Basic Model. 2nd ed. International Standard, ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. Geneva: ISO,
1994.
[D2] TM Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 132.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September
2015.
[D3] AOS Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.0-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, September
2015.
[D4] Spectral
Grids
for
WDM
Applications:
DWDM
Frequency
Grid.
ITU-T
Recommendation G.694.1. Geneva: ITU, 2012.
[D5] B. Moision and J. Hamkins. “Coded Modulation for the Deep-Space Optical Channel:
Serially Concatenated Pulse-Position Modulation.” IPN Progress Report 42-161 (May
15, 2005).
[D6] Robert M. Gagliardi and Sherman Karp. Optical Communications. 2nd ed. Hoboken,
New Jersey: Wiley, March 1995.
[D7] Hamid Hemmati, ed. Deep Space Optical Communications. Hoboken, New Jersey:
Wiley, June 2006.
[D8] Unified Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2018.