Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
SPACE DATA LINK
SECURITY PROTOCOL
RECOMMENDED STANDARD
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
BLUE BOOK
July 2022
Recommendation for Space Data System Standards
SPACE DATA LINK
SECURITY PROTOCOL
RECOMMENDED STANDARD
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
BLUE BOOK
July 2022
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page i
July 2022
AUTHORITY
Issue:
Recommended Standard, Issue 2
Date:
July 2022
Location:
Washington, DC, USA
This document has been approved for publication by the Management Council of the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) and represents the consensus
technical agreement of the participating CCSDS Member Agencies. The procedure for
review and authorization of CCSDS documents is detailed in Organization and Processes for
the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS A02.1-Y-4), and the record of
Agency participation in the authorization of this document can be obtained from the CCSDS
Secretariat at the email address below.
This document is published and maintained by:
CCSDS Secretariat
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC, USA
Email: secretariat@mailman.ccsds.org
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page ii
July 2022
STATEMENT OF INTENT
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) is an organization officially
established by the management of its members. The Committee meets periodically to address
data systems problems that are common to all participants, and to formulate sound technical
solutions to these problems. Inasmuch as participation in the CCSDS is completely
voluntary, the results of Committee actions are termed Recommended Standards and are
not considered binding on any Agency.
This Recommended Standard is issued by, and represents the consensus of, the CCSDS
members. Endorsement of this Recommendation is entirely voluntary. Endorsement,
however, indicates the following understandings:
o Whenever a member establishes a CCSDS-related standard, this standard will be in
accord with the relevant Recommended Standard. Establishing such a standard
does not preclude other provisions which a member may develop.
o Whenever a member establishes a CCSDS-related standard, that member will
provide other CCSDS members with the following information:
-- The standard itself.
-- The anticipated date of initial operational capability.
-- The anticipated duration of operational service.
o Specific service arrangements shall be made via memoranda of agreement. Neither
this Recommended Standard nor any ensuing standard is a substitute for a
memorandum of agreement.
No later than five years from its date of issuance, this Recommended Standard will be
reviewed by the CCSDS to determine whether it should: (1) remain in effect without change;
(2) be changed to reflect the impact of new technologies, new requirements, or new
directions; or (3) be retired or canceled.
In those instances when a new version of a Recommended Standard is issued, existing
CCSDS-related member standards and implementations are not negated or deemed to be
non-CCSDS compatible. It is the responsibility of each member to determine when such
standards or implementations are to be modified. Each member is, however, strongly
encouraged to direct planning for its new standards and implementations towards the later
version of the Recommended Standard.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page iii
July 2022
FOREWORD
This document describes a protocol for applying security services to the CCSDS Space Data
Link Protocols used by space missions over a space link.
Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the
subject of patent rights. CCSDS has processes for identifying patent issues and for securing
from the patent holder agreement that all licensing policies are reasonable and non-
discriminatory. However, CCSDS does not have a patent law staff, and CCSDS shall not be
held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.
Through the process of normal evolution, it is expected that expansion, deletion, or
modification of this document may occur. This Recommended Standard is therefore subject
to CCSDS document management and change control procedures, which are defined in
Organization and Processes for the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems
(CCSDS A02.1-Y-4). Current versions of CCSDS documents are maintained at the CCSDS
Web site:
http://www.ccsds.org/
Questions relating to the contents or status of this document should be sent to the CCSDS
Secretariat at the email address indicated on page i.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page iv
July 2022
At time of publication, the active Member and Observer Agencies of the CCSDS were:
Member Agencies
– Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI)/Italy.
– Canadian Space Agency (CSA)/Canada.
– Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES)/France.
– China National Space Administration (CNSA)/People’s Republic of China.
– Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)/Germany.
– European Space Agency (ESA)/Europe.
– Federal Space Agency (FSA)/Russian Federation.
– Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE)/Brazil.
– Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)/Japan.
– National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)/USA.
– UK Space Agency/United Kingdom.
Observer Agencies
–
Austrian Space Agency (ASA)/Austria.
–
Belgian Science Policy Office (BELSPO)/Belgium.
–
Central Research Institute of Machine Building (TsNIIMash)/Russian Federation.
–
China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General, Beijing Institute of Tracking and
Telecommunications Technology (CLTC/BITTT)/China.
–
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)/China.
–
China Academy of Space Technology (CAST)/China.
–
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO)/Australia.
–
Danish National Space Center (DNSC)/Denmark.
–
Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia Aeroespacial (DCTA)/Brazil.
–
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)/Korea.
–
European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT)/Europe.
–
European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT)/Europe.
–
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency (GISTDA)/Thailand.
–
Hellenic National Space Committee (HNSC)/Greece.
–
Hellenic Space Agency (HSA)/Greece.
–
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO)/India.
–
Institute of Space Research (IKI)/Russian Federation.
–
Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI)/Korea.
–
Ministry of Communications (MOC)/Israel.
–
Mohammed Bin Rashid Space Centre (MBRSC)/United Arab Emirates.
–
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)/Japan.
–
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/USA.
–
National Space Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NSARK)/Kazakhstan.
–
National Space Organization (NSPO)/Chinese Taipei.
–
Naval Center for Space Technology (NCST)/USA.
–
Netherlands Space Office (NSO)/The Netherlands.
–
Research Institute for Particle & Nuclear Physics (KFKI)/Hungary.
–
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)/Turkey.
–
South African National Space Agency (SANSA)/Republic of South Africa.
–
Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO)/Pakistan.
–
Swedish Space Corporation (SSC)/Sweden.
–
Swiss Space Office (SSO)/Switzerland.
–
United States Geological Survey (USGS)/USA.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page v
July 2022
DOCUMENT CONTROL
Document
Title
Date
Status
CCSDS
355.0-B-1
Space Data Link Security Protocol,
Recommended Standard, Issue 1
September
2015
Original issue,
superseded
CCSDS
355.0-B-2
Space Data Link Security Protocol,
Recommended Standard, Issue 2
July 2022
Current issue:
– adds specifications for
Unified Space Data
Link Protocol support;
– adds normative
reference to Space Data
Link Security Protocol—
Extended Procedures.
NOTE – Substantive changes from the original issue are marked by change bars in the
inside margin.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page vi
July 2022
CONTENTS
Section
Page
1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1-1
1.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................... 1-1
1.2 SCOPE .................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.3 APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................... 1-1
1.4 RATIONALE .......................................................................................................... 1-2
1.5 DOCUMENT STRUCTURE ................................................................................. 1-2
1.6 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................ 1-3
1.7 CONVENTIONS .................................................................................................... 1-3
1.8 REFERENCES ....................................................................................................... 1-4
2 OVERVIEW ................................................................................................................... 2-1
2.1 CONCEPT OF SECURITY PROTOCOL .............................................................. 2-1
2.2 FEATURES OF SECURITY PROTOCOL ............................................................ 2-2
2.3 SERVICE FUNCTIONS ........................................................................................ 2-7
3 SERVICE DEFINITION ............................................................................................... 3-1
3.1 OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................... 3-1
3.2 FUNCTION AT THE SENDING END ................................................................. 3-1
3.3 FUNCTION AT THE RECEIVING END ............................................................. 3-4
3.4 SECURITY ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT SERVICE .................................. 3-8
4 PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION .................................................................................. 4-1
4.1 PROTOCOL DATA UNITS .................................................................................. 4-1
4.2 SECURITY PROTOCOL PROCEDURES ............................................................ 4-3
5 USE OF THE SERVICES WITH CCSDS PROTOCOLS ........................................ 5-1
5.1 TM PROTOCOL .................................................................................................... 5-1
5.2 TC PROTOCOL ..................................................................................................... 5-1
5.3 AOS PROTOCOL .................................................................................................. 5-2
5.4 USLP ....................................................................................................................... 5-3
5.5 SUMMARY OF PROTOCOL SERVICES ............................................................ 5-3
6 MANAGED PARAMETERS ....................................................................................... 6-1
6.1 OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................... 6-1
6.2 REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................. 6-1
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page vii
July 2022
CONTENTS (continued)
Section
Page
7 CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS ....................................................................... 7-1
ANNEX A PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION CONFORMANCE
STATEMENT (PICS) PROFORMA (NORMATIVE) .............................. A-1
ANNEX B SECURITY, SANA, AND PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
(INFORMATIVE) ..........................................................................................B-1
ANNEX C ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS (INFORMATIVE) ..................... C-1
ANNEX D INFORMATIVE REFERENCES (INFORMATIVE) ............................... D-1
ANNEX E BASELINE IMPLEMENTATION MODE (INFORMATIVE) .................E-1
Figure
2-1 Security Protocol within OSI Model ............................................................................ 2-1
2-2 Security Protocol Interaction with Space Link Frames ................................................ 2-3
2-3 Security Protocol Support for TM Services .................................................................. 2-3
2-4 Security Protocol Support for TC Services .................................................................. 2-4
2-5 Security Protocol Support for AOS Services ................................................................ 2-5
2-6 Security Protocol Support for USLP Services .............................................................. 2-6
4-1 Security Header ............................................................................................................ 4-1
4-2 Security Trailer ............................................................................................................. 4-3
5-1 TM Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol ......................................................... 5-1
5-2 TC Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol .......................................................... 5-2
5-3 AOS Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol ....................................................... 5-2
5-4 USLP Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol ..................................................... 5-3
E-1 Security Header (TM Baseline) .................................................................................... E-1
E-2 Security Trailer (TM Baseline) ..................................................................................... E-2
E-3 Security Header (TC Baseline) ..................................................................................... E-2
E-4 Security Trailer (TC Baseline) ...................................................................................... E-3
E-5 Security Header (AOS Baseline) .................................................................................. E-4
E-6 Security Trailer (AOS Baseline) ................................................................................... E-4
E-7 Security Header (USLP Baseline) ................................................................................ E-5
E-8 Security Trailer (USLP Baseline) ................................................................................. E-5
Table
5-1 Summary of Protocol and Services Support ................................................................. 5-4
6-1 Managed Parameters for Security Protocol .................................................................. 6-1
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 1-1
July 2022
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Recommended Standard is to specify the Space Data Link Security Protocol
(hereafter referred as the Security Protocol) for CCSDS data links. This protocol provides a
security header and trailer along with associated procedures that may be used with the CCSDS
Telemetry, Telecommand, Advanced Orbiting Systems, and Unified Space Data Link Protocols
(references [1], [2], [3], and [5]) to provide a structured method for applying data
authentication and/or data confidentiality at the Data Link Layer.
1.2
SCOPE
This Recommended Standard defines the Security Protocol in terms of:
a) the protocol data units employed by the service provider; and
b) the procedures performed by the service provider.
It does not specify:
a) individual implementations or products;
b) the implementation of service interfaces within real systems;
c) the methods or technologies required to perform the procedures; or
d) the management activities required to configure and control the service.
This Recommended Standard does not mandate the use of any particular cryptographic
algorithm with the Security Protocol. Reference [4] provides a listing of algorithms
recommended by CCSDS; any organization should conduct a risk assessment before
choosing to substitute other algorithms. Annex E (non-normative) defines baseline
implementations suitable for a large range of space missions.
To manage the Security Protocol over a space link, a set of procedures has been specified:
the Space Data Link Security (SDLS) Protocol Extended Procedures (EP) (reference [6]).
1.3
APPLICABILITY
This Recommended Standard applies to the creation of Agency standards and for secure data
communications over space links between CCSDS Agencies in cross-support situations. The
Recommended Standard includes comprehensive specification of the service for inter-
Agency cross support. It is neither a specification of, nor a design for, real systems that may
be implemented for existing or future missions.
The Recommended Standard specified in this document is to be invoked through the normal
standards programs of each CCSDS Agency, and is applicable to those missions for which
interoperability and cross support based on capabilities described in this Recommended
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 1-2
July 2022
Standard is anticipated. Where mandatory capabilities are clearly indicated in sections of the
Recommended Standard, they must be implemented when this document is used as a basis
for interoperability and cross support. Where options are allowed or implied,
implementation of these options is subject to specific bilateral cross support agreements
between the Agencies involved.
1.4
RATIONALE
The goals of this Recommended Standard are to:
a) provide a standard method of applying security at the Data Link Layer, independent of
the underlying cryptographic algorithms employed by any particular space mission;
b) preserve compatibility with existing CCSDS Space Data Link Protocol Transfer
Frame Header and Trailer formats and frame processing implementations so that,
when appropriate, legacy frame processing infrastructure may continue to be used
without modification;
c) preserve compatibility with the CCSDS Space Link Extension (SLE) forward and
return services; and
d) facilitate the development of common commercial implementations to improve
interoperability across agencies.
More discussion of the Security Protocol’s goals and design choices, including its interaction
with other CCSDS services, may be found in reference [D3].
1.5
DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
This document is organized as follows:
Section 1 presents the purpose, scope, applicability, and rationale of this Recommended
Standard and lists the conventions, definitions, and references used throughout the document.
Section 2 (informative) provides an overview of the Security Protocol.
Section 3 (normative) defines the services provided by the protocol entity.
Section 4 (normative) specifies the protocol data units provided for these services and the
procedures employed by the service provider.
Section 5 (normative) specifies the constraints associated with these services for each of the
supported Space Data Link Protocols.
Section 6 (normative) lists the managed parameters associated with these services.
Section 7 (normative) specifies how to verify an implementation’s conformance with the
Security Protocol.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 1-3
July 2022
Annex A (normative) provides a Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS)
proforma for the Security Protocol.
Annex B (informative) provides an overview of security, SANA registry, and patent
considerations related to this Recommended Standard.
Annex C (informative) provides a glossary of abbreviations and acronyms that appear in the
document.
Annex D (informative) provides a list of informative references.
Annex E (informative) defines baseline implementations suitable for a large range of space
missions.
1.6
DEFINITIONS
1.6.1 DEFINITIONS FROM INFORMATION SECURITY GLOSSARY OF TERMS
This Recommended Standard makes use of a number of terms defined in reference [7].
1.6.2 TERMS DEFINED IN THIS RECOMMENDED STANDARD
For the purposes of this Recommended Standard, the following definitions also apply.
Payload: Data input to be processed by a Security Protocol function.
ApplySecurity Payload: Payload to the ApplySecurity function.
ProcessSecurity Payload: Payload to the ProcessSecurity function.
Authentication Payload: Part of the Transfer Frame to be authenticated.
1.7
CONVENTIONS
1.7.1 NOMENCLATURE
The following conventions apply for the normative specifications in this Recommended Standard:
a) the words ‘shall’ and ‘must’ imply a binding and verifiable specification;
b) the word ‘should’ implies an optional, but desirable, specification;
c) the word ‘may’ implies an optional specification;
d) the words ‘is’, ‘are’, and ‘will’ imply statements of fact.
NOTE – These conventions do not imply constraints on diction in text that is clearly
informative in nature.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 1-4
July 2022
1.7.2 INFORMATIVE TEXT
In the normative sections of this document, informative text is set off from the normative
specifications either in notes or under one of the following subsection headings:
– Overview;
– Background;
– Rationale;
– Discussion.
1.8
REFERENCES
The following publications contain provisions which, through reference in this text,
constitute provisions of this document. At the time of publication, the editions indicated
were valid. All publications are subject to revision, and users of this document are
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the
publications indicated below. The CCSDS Secretariat maintains a register of currently valid
CCSDS publications.
[1]
TM Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 3. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 132.0-B-3. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[2]
TC Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 232.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[3]
AOS Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[4]
CCSDS Cryptographic Algorithms. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 352.0-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, August 2019.
[5]
Unified Space Data Link Protocol. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data System
Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 732.1-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, October 2021.
[6]
Space Data Link Security Protocol—Extended Procedures. Issue 1. Recommendation
for Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 355.1-B-1. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, February 2019.
[7]
Information Security Glossary of Terms. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data
System Practices (Magenta Book), CCSDS 350.8-M-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
February 2020.
NOTE – Informative references are listed in annex D.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-1
July 2022
2 OVERVIEW
2.1
CONCEPT OF SECURITY PROTOCOL
The SDLS Protocol is a data processing method for space missions that need to apply
authentication and/or confidentiality to the contents of Transfer Frames used by Space Data
Link Protocols over a space link. The Security Protocol is provided only at the Data Link
Layer (Layer 2) of the OSI Basic Reference Model (reference [D1]), as illustrated in figure 2-1.
It is an extra service of the Space Data Link Protocols defined in references [1], [2], [3], and
[5], and therefore is to be used together with one of these references. (The Security Protocol
is not applicable for use with the Proximity-1 Space Data Link Protocol.)
Physical
Data Link
Network
Transport
Session
Presentation
Application
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
OSI LAYERS
Synchronization &
Channel Coding Sublayer
Data Link Protocol Sublayer
Security Protocol
CCSDS LAYERS
Figure 2-1: Security Protocol within OSI Model
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-2
July 2022
2.2
FEATURES OF SECURITY PROTOCOL
2.2.1 GENERAL
The purpose of the Security Protocol is to provide a secure standard method, with associated
data structures, for performing security functions on octet-aligned user data within Space
Data Link Protocol Transfer Frames over a space link. The maximum length of input data
that can be accommodated is not limited by the Security Protocol, but is an attribute of the
related Space Data Link Protocol. Both Security Header and Trailer are provided for
delimiting the protected data and conveying the necessary cryptographic parameters within
Transfer Frames. The size of the Security Header and Trailer reduces the maximum size of
the Transfer Frame Data Field allowed by the underlying Space Data Link Protocol.
The Security Protocol preserves the quality of service that is provided by the Space Data
Link Protocol. The Security Protocol is scalable to operate across any number of Virtual
Channels supported by the Space Data Link Protocols. The use and sizes of a Security
Header and a Security Trailer for a given Global Virtual Channel or Global Multiplexer
Access Point (GMAP) are managed parameters that remain constant for a given mission.
To operate the Security Protocol over a space link, a set of procedures is specified in Space
Data Link Security Protocol—Extended Procedures (reference [6]). Those extended
procedures define:
– key management, security association management, and SDLS monitoring and
control services;
– procedures and associated protocol data units for those three services;
– interfaces with the SDLS and Space Data Link (SDL) protocols.
2.2.2 DATA LINK LAYER PROTOCOLS
Two sublayers of the Data Link Layer are defined for CCSDS space link protocols as shown
in reference [D4]. Each of the four supported Space Data Link Protocols, Telemetry (TM),
Telecommand (TC), Advanced Orbiting Systems (AOS), and Unified Space Data Link
Protocol (USLP), correspond to the Data Link Protocol Sublayer. Operation of the Security
Protocol is unaffected by the Synchronization and Channel Coding Sublayer.
Figure 2-2 shows a simplified representation of Space Data Link Protocol frames and the
effect of the Security Protocol’s inserting header and optional trailer fields to surround the
frame data supplied by higher layers. The detailed structure of the TM, TC, AOS, and USLP
Transfer Frames with the Security Protocol is given in references [1], [2], [3], and [5],
respectively, and repeated below in figures 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, and 5-4 for reference.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-3
July 2022
Space Link Protocol
Frame Headers
(may be multiple)
TRANSFER FRAME WITHOUT SDLS
Frame Data
Space Link Protocol
Frame Trailers
(may be multiple)
TRANSFER FRAME WITH SDLS
Frame Data
(secured by authentication and/or encryption)
Security
Header
Security
Trailer
(optional)
Space Link Protocol
Frame Headers
(may be multiple)
Space Link Protocol
Frame Trailers
(may be multiple)
Figure 2-2: Security Protocol Interaction with Space Link Frames
2.2.3 SECURITY SERVICE FOR TM
The relationship of the Security Protocol’s functions to the TM Protocol is shown in
figure 2-3. The figure shows the sending end of a physical channel.
Security Protocol Entity
ApplySecurity Function
Apply encryption and
authentication to the frame
according to the
Security Association
Almost-complete frames
from external sources (\*)
Data for auxiliary data fields
in the frame
Data for the
Transfer Frame Data Field
VC Packet Service
VC Access Service
VC\_FSH Service
VC\_OCF Service
MC\_FSH Service
MC\_OCF Service
VC Frame Service
MC Frame Service
Synchronization and Channel Coding
TM Protocol Entity
•
Select data for Transfer Frame Data Field
•
Construct a partial Transfer Frame
•
Call the ApplySecurity function for the frame
•
Complete the frame
The TM Protocol also contains:
•
Multiplexing for VCs
•
Multiplexing for MCs
NOTE: TM services not supported by the security protocol are shown greyed-out and italicized
A
B
(\*) Almost-complete transfer frames are frames without the following fields : Master Frame Count, Operational Control Field, Frame Error Control Field
A : TM ApplySecurity payload
B : TM ApplySecurity return
Figure 2-3: Security Protocol Support for TM Services
The Security Protocol provides all its functions (authentication, encryption, and
authenticated encryption) for the data in the Transfer Frame Data Field of a TM Transfer
Frame. It therefore provides full protection for the service data of the following TM
Services: the Virtual Channel Packet (VCP) Service and the Virtual Channel Access (VCA)
Service.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-4
July 2022
The Security Protocol provides authentication for some fields in the Transfer Frame Primary
Header and for some auxiliary data fields in a TM Transfer Frame. It does not provide
encryption for these fields. The Security Protocol can provide authentication protection for
the service data of the Virtual Channel Frame Secondary Header (VC\_FSH) Service.
The Security Protocol provides no protection for data of the other TM Services that use
auxiliary data fields in a TM Transfer Frame: the Virtual Channel Operational Control Field
(VC\_OCF) Service, the Master Channel Frame Secondary Header (MC\_FSH) Service, and
the Master Channel Operational Control Field (MC\_OCF) Service. The Security Protocol
also provides no protection for the frames supplied to the TM Protocol by external sources
on the following services: the Virtual Channel Frame (VCF) Service and the Master Channel
Frame (MCF) Service.
2.2.4 SECURITY SERVICE FOR TC
The relationship of the Security Protocol’s functions to the TC Protocol is shown in
figure 2-4. The figure shows the sending end of a physical channel.
Security Protocol Entity
ApplySecurity Function
Apply encryption and
authentication to the frame
according to the
Security Association
Almost-complete frames
from external sources (\*)
Control information for
COP-1 protocol
Data for the
Transfer Frame Data Field
MAP Packet Service
MAP Access Service
VC Packet Service
VC Access Service
COP Management Service
VC Frame Service
MC Frame Service
Synchronization and Channel Coding
TC Protocol Entity
•
Select data for Transfer Frame Data Field
•
Construct a partial Transfer Frame
•
Call the ApplySecurity function for the frame
•
Complete the frame
The TC Protocol also contains:
•
Multiplexing for MAPs
•
COP-1 protocol
•
Multiplexing for VCs
•
Multiplexing for MCs
NOTE: TC services not supported by the security protocol are shown greyed-out and italicized
A
B
(\*) Almost-complete transfer frames are frames without the following fields : Frame Error Control Field
A : TC ApplySecurity payload
B : TC ApplySecurity return
Figure 2-4: Security Protocol Support for TC Services
The Security Protocol provides all its functions (authentication, encryption, and
authenticated encryption) for the data in the Transfer Frame Data Field of a TC Transfer
Frame. It therefore provides full protection for the service data of the following TC Services:
the Multiplexer Access Point (MAP) Packet (MAPP) Service, the MAP Access (MAPA)
Service, the Virtual Channel Packet (VCP) Service, and the Virtual Channel Access (VCA)
Service.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-5
July 2022
The Security Protocol provides authentication for some fields in the Transfer Frame Primary
Header in a TC Transfer Frame. It does not provide encryption for these fields.
There are no auxiliary data fields in a TC Transfer Frame. The Security Protocol provides no
protection for the control frames generated for the Communications Operation Procedure
(COP) Management Service (see references [D11] and [D10]). The Security Protocol also
provides no protection for the frames supplied to the TC Protocol by external sources on the
following services: the VCF Service and the MCF Service.
2.2.5 SECURITY SERVICE FOR AOS
The relationship of the Security Protocol’s functions to the AOS Protocol is shown in
figure 2-5. The figure shows the sending end of a physical channel.
VC\_OCF Service
Insert Service
Security Protocol Entity
ApplySecurity Function
Apply encryption and
authentication to the frame
according to the
Security Association
Almost-complete frames
from external sources (\*)
Data for auxiliary data fields
in the frame
Data for the
Transfer Frame Data Field
VC Packet Service
Bitstream Service
VC Access Service
VC Frame Service
MC Frame Service
Synchronization and Channel Coding
AOS Protocol Entity
•
Select data for Transfer Frame Data Field
•
Construct a partial Transfer Frame
•
Call the ApplySecurity function for the frame
•
Complete the frame
The AOS Protocol also contains:
•
Multiplexing for VCs
•
Multiplexing for MCs
NOTE: AOS services not supported by the security protocol are shown greyed-out and italicized
A
B
(\*) Almost-complete transfer frames are frames without the following fields : Operational Control Field, Frame Error Control Field
A : AOS ApplySecurity payload
B : AOS ApplySecurity return
Figure 2-5: Security Protocol Support for AOS Services
The Security Protocol provides all its functions (authentication, encryption, and
authenticated encryption) for the data in the Transfer Frame Data Field of an AOS Transfer
Frame. It therefore provides full protection for the service data of the following AOS
Services: the VCP Service, the Bitstream Service, and the VCA Service.
The Security Protocol provides authentication for some fields in the Transfer Frame Primary
Header in an AOS Transfer Frame. It does not provide encryption for these fields.
The Security Protocol provides no protection for data of the AOS Services that use auxiliary data
fields in an AOS Transfer Frame: the VC\_OCF Service and the Insert Service. The Security
Protocol also provides no protection for the frames supplied to the AOS Protocol by external
sources on the following services: the VCF Service and the MCF Service.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-6
July 2022
2.2.6 SECURITY SERVICE FOR USLP
The relationship of the Security Protocol’s functions to USLP is shown in figure 2-6. The
figure shows the sending end of a physical channel.
MC\_OCF Service
Insert Service
Security Protocol Entity
ApplySecurity Function
Apply encryption and
authentication to the frame
according to the
Security Association
Almost-complete frames
from external sources (\*)
Data for auxiliary data fields
in the frame
Data for the
Transfer Frame Data Field
MAP Packet Service
MAP Octet Stream Service
MAP Access Service
VC Frame Service
MC Frame Service
Synchronization and Channel Coding
USLP Protocol Entity
•
Select data for Transfer Frame Data Field
•
Construct a partial Transfer Frame
•
Call the ApplySecurity function for the frame
•
Complete the frame
The USLP Protocol also
contains:
•
Multiplexing for VCs
•
Multiplexing for MCs
NOTE: USLP services not supported by the security protocol are shown greyed-out and italicized
A
B
(\*) Almost-complete transfer frames are frames without the following fields : Operational Control Field, Frame Error Control Field
A : USLP ApplySecurity payload
B : USLP ApplySecurity return
COP Management
Service
Control information for
COP-1 and COP-P
protocol
Figure 2-6: Security Protocol Support for USLP Services
The Security Protocol provides all its functions (authentication, encryption, and
authenticated encryption) for the data in the Transfer Frame Data Field of a USLP Transfer
Frame. It therefore provides full protection for the service data of the following USLP
Services: the MAPP Service, the MAP Octet Stream Service, and the MAPA Service.
The Security Protocol provides authentication for some fields in the Transfer Frame Primary
Header in a USLP Transfer Frame. It does not provide encryption for these fields.
The Security Protocol provides no protection for data of the USLP Services that use auxiliary
data fields in a USLP Transfer Frame: the MC\_OCF Service and the Insert Service. The
Security Protocol also provides no protection for the frames supplied to USLP by external
sources on the following services: the VCF Service and the MCF Service.
The Security Protocol provides no protection for the control frames generated for the COPs
Management Service (see references [D11] and [D10]).
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-7
July 2022
2.3
SERVICE FUNCTIONS
2.3.1 SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS
2.3.1.1 General
The Security Protocol provides security associations for defining the cryptographic
communications parameters to be used by both the sending and receiving ends of a
communications session, and for maintaining state information for the duration of the session.
A Security Association (SA) defines a simplex (one-way), stateful cryptographic session for
providing authentication, data integrity, replay protection, and/or data confidentiality.
2.3.1.2 Security Association Context
All Transfer Frames that share the same SA on a physical channel constitute a Secure
Channel. A Secure Channel consists of one or more Global Virtual Channels or Global MAP
IDs (TC only) assigned to an SA at the time of its creation.
The Security Parameter Index (SPI) is a transmitted value that uniquely identifies the SA
applicable to a Transfer Frame. All Transfer Frames having the same SPI on a physical
channel share a single SA. The SPI can be considered as a table index key to an SA data base
that stores all of the managed information required by each of the SAs on a physical channel.
2.3.1.3 Security Association Service Types
When an SA is created, one of the following cryptographic functions is selected to be applied
on specified fields for all Transfer Frames using that SA:
a) authentication;
b) encryption;
c) authenticated encryption.
Once an SA is created, the authentication and/or encryption algorithms specified, along with
their modes of operation, are fixed and cannot be changed for the duration of the SA.
2.3.1.4 Security Header and Trailer
All Transfer Frames using an SA on a physical channel include a Security Header and Trailer
surrounding the Frame Data area of the Transfer Frame. The Security Header carries the SPI,
initialization vector, anti-replay sequence number, length of any block padding used (when
necessary); the Security Trailer carries a Message Authentication Code (MAC).
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-8
July 2022
The detailed structure of the TM, TC, AOS, and USLP Transfer Frames with the Security
Protocol is given in references [1], [2], [3], and [5], respectively, and repeated below in
figures 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, and 5-4 for reference.
Once an SA is created, the lengths of the managed fields in the Security Header and Trailer
are fixed for the duration of that SA.
2.3.1.5 Security Association Management
Both the sender and the receiver must create an SA, associate it with cryptographic key(s),
and activate it before the SA may be used to secure Transfer Frames on a channel.
SAs may be statically preloaded prior to the start of a mission. SAs may also be created
dynamically as needed, even while other existing SAs are active. The mechanism for
switching from one active SA to another is an Application Layer function.
NOTE – Over-the-air negotiation of SA parameters is a (currently undefined) Application
Layer function.
2.3.2 AUTHENTICATION
2.3.2.1 General
The Security Protocol provides for the use of authentication algorithms to ensure the
integrity of transmitted data and the authenticity of the data source. The Security Protocol
also provides for the use of sequence numbering to detect the unauthorized replay of
previously transmitted data.
2.3.2.2 Message Authentication and Integrity
When the Security Protocol is used for authentication, a MAC is computed over the specified
Transfer Frame fields, which are the Frame Header, the optional Frame Secondary Header
(TM only), the optional Segment Header (TC only), the Security Header (as part of this
security protocol), and the Frame Data Field. An SA providing authentication also manages
an authentication bit mask for that SA, enabling the sender and receiver to ‘mask out’ (i.e.,
substitute zeros in place of) certain bit fields within the headers from the input to the MAC
computation. Transfer Frame fields always excluded from MAC computation are the
optional Insert Zone (AOS and USLP only), optional Operational Control Field (OCF),
optional Error Control Field (ECF), and the MAC field itself within the Security Trailer.
Transfer Frame fields always included for MAC computation are the Virtual Channel ID,
Segment Header (TC only), Security Header (except for the Initialization Vector), and Frame
Data Field.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-9
July 2022
NOTE – The channel coding synchronization marker prepended to a Transfer Frame prior
to transmission (the Attached Sync Mark [ASM] in TM, AOS, and USLP, or the
Communications Link Transmission Unit [CLTU] Start Sequence in TC) is
always excluded from MAC computation.
2.3.2.3 Replay Protection
2.3.2.3.1 General
When the Security Protocol is used for authentication, a sequence number is also transmitted
in the Transfer Frame. As part of an SA providing authentication, both the sender and
receiver manage the following information:
a) a sequence number value (current value for the sender, expected value for the
receiver);
b) a sequence number window for comparison by the receiver;
c) the location within the Transfer Frame of the sequence number.
2.3.2.3.2 Sequence Number
The sender increments its managed sequence number by one with each transmitted frame
belonging to that SA. With each valid received frame belonging to that SA, the receiver will
replace its stored sequence number with the received value on the condition that the received
sequence number is higher than the stored sequence number. Additionally, if the received
Sequence Number differs from the expected value by more than a defined positive value
called the Sequence Number Window, the receiver discards the frame and neither replaces
nor increments its stored sequence number.
NOTE – The interpretation of a sequence number rollover (to zero) is mission-specific.
Possible interpretations and problems linked with this rollover are discussed in
reference [D3].
2.3.2.3.3 Sequence Number Window
The sequence number window is a fixed positive delta value, specified in the SA, for the
receiver to use in comparing the sequence number received to the expected value. A
received frame whose sequence number falls outside this window is discarded. The size of
the selected window accounts for predicted delays and gaps in RF transmission.
2.3.2.3.4 Sequence Number Location
The location of the transmitted Sequence Number in the Transfer Frame is specified in the
SA. Two options are provided:
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 2-10
July 2022
a) The Sequence Number can be located in the Sequence Number field of the Security
Header. In this case, its length is a managed SA parameter.
b) For systems that implement authenticated encryption using a simple incrementing
counter as an initialization vector (i.e., as in counter-mode cryptographic algorithms),
the Initialization Vector field of the Security Header can serve also as the Sequence
Number. In this case, the Sequence Number field in the Security Header is zero
octets in length.
2.3.3 ENCRYPTION
The Security Protocol provides for the use of encryption algorithms to ensure the
confidentiality of transmitted data.
When the Security Protocol is used for encryption, the data area of the frame (the ‘plaintext’)
is replaced with an encrypted version of the same data (the ‘ciphertext’). An initialization
vector is often used as an input to the encryption process. Depending upon the cryptographic
algorithm and mode used, additional fill data may be needed to pad any undersized blocks.
NOTE – Encryption used without authentication can provide a false sense of security,
depending upon the specific implementation. Selection of security services should
be done carefully after considering a mission-specific threat and risk analysis.
2.3.4 AUTHENTICATED ENCRYPTION
The Security Protocol provides for the use of authentication and encryption as one combined
(‘encrypt-then-MAC’) procedure.
When the Security Protocol is used for authenticated encryption, the frame data supplied by
the user is first encrypted as described in 2.3.3, a current anti-replay sequence number is
applied to the Transfer Frame, and lastly a MAC is computed over the resultant Transfer
Frame as described in 2.3.2.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-1
July 2022
3 SERVICE DEFINITION
3.1
OVERVIEW
This section provides the service definition for the Security Protocol.
The services that the Security Protocol provides to the Space Data Link Protocols are defined
as functions. The ApplySecurity Function is defined for the sending end of a physical
channel and the ProcessSecurity Function is defined for the receiving end. The definitions of
the functions are independent of specific implementation approaches.
The parameters of the functions are specified in an abstract sense and specify the information
passed in either direction between the Space Data Link Protocol entity that calls the function
and the Security Protocol entity that executes the function. The way in which a specific
implementation makes this information available is not constrained by this specification. In
addition to the parameters specified in this section, an implementation may provide other
parameters on the function interface (e.g., parameters for controlling the service, monitoring
performance, facilitating diagnosis, and so on).
This section also defines the Security Association Management Service.
3.2
FUNCTION AT THE SENDING END
3.2.1 OVERVIEW
The ApplySecurity Function is defined for the sending end of a physical channel. The
function processes a Transfer Frame to apply security features to the frame. The Transfer
Frame is a protocol (TM, TC, AOS, or USLP) data structure that is in use on the physical
channel.
The input parameters of the function include the ApplySecurity Payload, containing the
partially formatted frame, and the identifiers of the Virtual Channel and the MAP channel
(for TC and USLP only). When the function is called, the Security Protocol applies
encryption and/or authentication to the data supplied in the ApplySecurity Payload. In any
given call to the ApplySecurity Function, the processing depends on the settings for the
Security Association of the applicable Virtual Channel or MAP.
When the ApplySecurity Function has completed the processing, it returns the resulting data
to the caller in the return parameter, the ApplySecurity Return.
3.2.2 INPUT PARAMETERS
3.2.2.1 Discussion—ApplySecurity Payload
The ApplySecurity Function applies security processing to a partially formatted Transfer
Frame of the Space Data Link Protocol used on the physical channel.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-2
July 2022
The input parameter provided by the Space Data Link Protocol consists of an ApplySecurity
Payload, which is one of the following types:
a) TM ApplySecurity Payload;
b) TC ApplySecurity Payload;
c) AOS ApplySecurity Payload;
d) USLP ApplySecurity Payload.
3.2.2.2 TM ApplySecurity Payload
The TM ApplySecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the TM Transfer Frame (see
reference [1]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of
the Transfer Frame Data Field.
NOTES
1
The TM Transfer Frame is the fixed-length protocol data unit of the TM Space Data
Link Protocol. The length of any Transfer Frame transferred on a physical channel is
constant, and is established by management.
2
The portion of the TM Transfer Frame contained in the TM ApplySecurity Payload
parameter includes the Security Header field. When the ApplySecurity Function is
called, the Security Header field is empty; that is, the caller has not set any values in
the Security Header.
3.2.2.3 TC ApplySecurity Payload
The TC ApplySecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the TC Transfer Frame (see
reference [2]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of
the Transfer Frame Data Field.
NOTES
1
The TC Transfer Frame is the variable-length protocol data unit of the TC Space Data
Link Protocol.
2
The portion of the TC Transfer Frame contained in the TC ApplySecurity Payload
parameter includes the Security Header field. When the ApplySecurity Function is
called, the Security Header field is empty; that is, the caller has not set any values in
the Security Header.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-3
July 2022
3.2.2.4 AOS ApplySecurity Payload
The AOS ApplySecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the AOS Transfer Frame (see
reference [3]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of
the Transfer Frame Data Field.
NOTES
1
The AOS Transfer Frame is the fixed-length protocol data unit of the AOS Space
Data Link Protocol. The length of any Transfer Frame transferred on a physical
channel is constant, and is established by management.
2
The portion of the AOS Transfer Frame contained in the AOS ApplySecurity Payload
parameter includes the Security Header field. When the ApplySecurity Function is
called, the Security Header field is empty; that is, the caller has not set any values in
the Security Header.
3.2.2.5 USLP ApplySecurity Payload
The USLP ApplySecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the USLP Transfer Frame
(see reference [5]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet
of the Transfer Frame Data Field.
NOTES
1
The USLP Transfer Frame is the fixed-length or variable-length protocol data unit of
USLP. The length of a fixed-length USLP Transfer Frame transferred on a physical
channel is established by management.
2
The portion of the USLP Transfer Frame contained in the USLP ApplySecurity
Payload parameter includes the Security Header field. When the ApplySecurity
Function is called, the Security Header field is empty, that is, the caller has not set
any values in the Security Header.
3.2.2.6 GLOBAL VIRTUAL CHANNEL IDENTIFIER
The Global Virtual Channel Identifier (GVCID) parameter shall contain the ID of the Global
Virtual Channel (see references [1], [2], [3], and [5]) of the partially formatted Transfer
Frame contained in the ApplySecurity Payload.
NOTE – The GVCID consists of a Master Channel ID and a Virtual Channel ID.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-4
July 2022
3.2.2.7 GLOBAL MULTIPLEXER ACCESS POINT IDENTIFIER
The GMAP Identifier (GMAP\_ID) parameter shall contain the ID of the GMAP (see
references [2] and [5]) of the partially formatted TC or USLP Transfer Frame contained in
the TC or USLP ApplySecurity Payload.
NOTES
1
The GMAP\_ID consists of a GVCID and a TC or USLP MAP ID that indicates a
MAP Channel within the Virtual Channel specified by GVCID.
2
The GMAP\_ID is applicable only if the ApplySecurity Payload is a TC or USLP
ApplySecurity Payload and the Virtual Channel specified by the GVCID is using
Segment Headers (applicable only to TC).
3.2.3 RETURN PARAMETER—ApplySecurity Return
The ApplySecurity Return shall consist of the portion of the Transfer Frame starting at the
first octet of the Security Header and ending at the last octet of the Security Trailer, if
present, or the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field, if the Security Trailer is not
present.
NOTE – When the ApplySecurity function has completed the processing for the frame that
was input in the ApplySecurity Payload parameter, it returns part of the
processed frame in the ApplySecurity Return parameter.
3.3
FUNCTION AT THE RECEIVING END
3.3.1 OVERVIEW
The ProcessSecurity Function is defined for the receiving end of a physical channel. The
function provides the receiving end security processing for a Transfer Frame belonging to the
underlying protocol (TM, TC, AOS, or USLP) that is in use on the physical channel.
The input parameters include the ProcessSecurity Payload, containing the frame, and the
identifiers of the Virtual Channel and the MAP channel (TC and USLP only). When the
function is called, the Security Protocol always applies verification and may apply
decryption to the data supplied in the ProcessSecurity Payload. In any given call to the
ProcessSecurity Function, the processing depends on the settings for the Security Association
of the applicable Virtual Channel or MAP.
When the ProcessSecurity Function has completed the processing, it returns the results to the
caller in the return parameters, which include status indicators and the ProcessSecurity
Return.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-5
July 2022
3.3.2 INPUT PARAMETERS
3.3.2.1 Discussion—ProcessSecurity Payload
The ProcessSecurity Function applies security processing to a Transfer Frame of the Space
Data Link Protocol used on the physical channel.
The input parameter provided by the Space Data Link Protocol consists of a ProcessSecurity
Payload, which is one of the following types:
a) TM ProcessSecurity Payload;
b) TC ProcessSecurity Payload;
c) AOS ProcessSecurity Payload;
d) USLP ProcessSecurity Payload.
3.3.2.2 TM ProcessSecurity Payload
The TM ProcessSecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the TM Transfer Frame (see
reference [1]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of
the Security Trailer, if present, or the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field, if the
Security Trailer is not present.
NOTE – The TM Transfer Frame is the fixed-length protocol data unit of the TM Space
Data Link Protocol. The length is constrained by the TM Synchronization and
Channel Coding Blue Book (reference [D5]). The length of any Transfer Frame
transferred on a physical channel is constant, and is established by management.
3.3.2.3 TC ProcessSecurity Payload
The TC ProcessSecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the TC Transfer Frame (see
reference [2]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of
the Security Trailer, if present, or the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field, if the
Security Trailer is not present.
NOTE – The TC Transfer Frame is the variable-length protocol data unit of the TC Space
Data Link Protocol.
3.3.2.4 AOS ProcessSecurity Payload
The AOS ProcessSecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the AOS Transfer Frame
(see reference [3]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet
of the Security Trailer, if present, or the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field, if the
Security Trailer is not present.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-6
July 2022
NOTE – The AOS Transfer Frame is the fixed-length protocol data unit of the AOS Space
Data Link Protocol. The length is constrained by the TM Synchronization and
Channel Coding Blue Book (reference [D5]). The length of any Transfer Frame
transferred on a physical channel is constant, and is established by management.
3.3.2.5 USLP ProcessSecurity Payload
The USLP ProcessSecurity Payload shall consist of the portion of the USLP Transfer Frame
(see reference [5]) from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet
of the Security Trailer, if present, or the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field, if the
Security Trailer is not present.
NOTE – The USLP Transfer Frame is the variable- or fixed-length protocol data unit of USLP.
3.3.2.6 GVCID
The GVCID parameter shall contain the ID of the Global Virtual Channel (see references [1],
[2], [3], and [5]) of the partial Transfer Frame contained in the ProcessSecurity Payload.
NOTE – The GVCID consists of a Master Channel ID and a Virtual Channel ID.
3.3.2.7 GMAP ID
The GMAP\_ID parameter shall contain the ID of the GMAP (see references [2] and [5]) of
the partial TC or USLP Transfer Frame contained in the TC or USLP ProcessSecurity
Payload.
NOTES
1
The GMAP\_ID consists of a GVCID and a TC or USLP MAP ID that indicates a
MAP Channel within the Virtual Channel specified by GVCID.
2
The GMAP\_ID is applicable only if the ProcessSecurity Payload is a TC or USLP
ProcessSecurity Payload and the Virtual Channel specified by the GVCID is using
Segment Headers (applicable only to TC).
3.3.3 RETURN PARAMETERS
3.3.3.1 Verification Status
The Verification Status parameter supplied by the Security Protocol shall indicate one of the
following:
– no failures were detected; or
– the ProcessSecurity function has detected a failure.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-7
July 2022
NOTE – In addition to authentication failures, the ProcessSecurity function can detect
additional failures such as an invalid Security Association identification in the
Security Header. If no failure was detected, then the ProcessSecurity function
has performed successful authentication or the SA does not include
authentication.
3.3.3.2 Verification Status Code
If the Verification Status parameter indicates a failure, then the Verification Status Code
parameter shall contain a status code to indicate the type of failure. At a minimum, the
following failure conditions shall be supported:
– no failure;
– invalid SPI;
– MAC verification failure;
– anti-replay sequence number failure;
– padding error.
3.3.3.3 ProcessSecurity Return
The ProcessSecurity Return shall consist of the portion of the Transfer Frame corresponding
to the ProcessSecurity Payload, starting at the first octet following the Security Header and
ending at the last octet of the Transfer Frame Data Field.
NOTES
1
When the ProcessSecurity function has finished processing the frame that was input
in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter, it returns part of the processed frame in the
ProcessSecurity Return parameter. If the function has performed decryption then the
ProcessSecurity Return contains the decrypted data.
2
If the SA does not include encryption, then the ProcessSecurity function does not
perform decryption. Also, the ProcessSecurity function does not perform decryption
following a verification failure.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-8
July 2022
3.4
SECURITY ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT SERVICE
3.4.1 OVERVIEW
The Security Association Management Service establishes the context of an SA for a
particular Global Virtual Channel and/or MAP ID. This Recommended Standard specifies
only the service parameters contained in the Security Association data base. Implementation
of the services necessary to manage the parameters contained in the SA data base is a
mission-specific function. Service directives for managing the SA parameters in-line are
specified in the CCSDS SDLS Extended Procedures Recommended Standard (reference [6]).
3.4.2 SA MANAGEMENT SERVICE PARAMETERS
3.4.2.1 Overview
Each SA is composed of the commonly applicable parameters listed in 3.4.2.2 below, as well
as those parameters in 3.4.2.3 and 3.4.2.4 applicable to the cryptographic function(s)
specified in the SA.
3.4.2.2 Security Association Parameters required by all SAs
3.4.2.2.1 Global Virtual Channel ID
The GVCID parameter shall contain the ID of the Global Virtual Channel(s) (see references
[1], [2], [3], and [5]) applicable to the SA.
NOTES
1
The GVCID consists of a Master Channel ID and a Virtual Channel ID. If the TC
Space Data Link Protocol is used on the physical channel, a single Global Virtual
Channel is applicable to the SA (see requirement 5.2 c) ).
2
If USLP and a COP are used on the physical channel, a single Global Virtual Channel
is applicable to the SA (see requirement 5.4 c); see references [D11] and [D10]).
3.4.2.2.2 Global Multiplexer Access Point Identifier
The GMAP\_ID parameter shall contain the ID of the GMAP(s) (see references [2] and [5])
applicable to the SA.
NOTE – The GMAP\_ID consists of a GVCID and a TC or USLP MAP ID that indicates a
MAP Channel within the Virtual Channel specified by GVCID. The GMAP\_ID
is applicable only if the TC Space Data Link Protocol or USLP is used on the
physical channel and Segment Headers are used on the TC Virtual Channel. In
all other cases, it is not applicable.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-9
July 2022
3.4.2.2.3 Security Parameter Index
The Security Parameter Index parameter shall contain an index identifying the SA applicable
to a frame.
NOTE – Each SA on a physical channel is identified by a unique SPI.
3.4.2.2.4 SA\_service\_type
The SA\_service\_type parameter shall indicate the cryptographic function(s) specified for the
SA: one of authentication, encryption, or authenticated encryption.
3.4.2.2.5 SA\_length\_SN
The SA\_length\_SN parameter shall indicate the length of the Sequence Number field in the
Security Header.
3.4.2.2.6 SA\_length\_IV
The SA\_length\_IV parameter shall indicate the length of the Initialization Vector field in the
Security Header.
3.4.2.2.7 SA\_length\_PL
The SA\_length\_PL parameter shall indicate the length of the Pad Length field in the Security
Header.
3.4.2.2.8 SA\_length\_MAC
The SA\_length\_MAC parameter shall indicate the length of the MAC field in the Security
Trailer.
3.4.2.3 Security Association Parameters Specific to Authentication
NOTE – The parameters under this subsection are applicable only if the SA\_service\_type
parameter is Authentication or Authenticated Encryption.
3.4.2.3.1 SA\_authentication\_algorithm
The SA\_authentication\_algorithm parameter shall indicate the applicable authentication
algorithm and mode of operation.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-10
July 2022
3.4.2.3.2 SA\_authentication\_key
The SA\_authentication\_key parameter shall indicate the value of a provided authentication
key, or of an index that refers to the actual key.
3.4.2.3.3 SA\_authentication\_mask
The SA\_authentication\_mask parameter shall indicate the value of a provided bit mask that
is applied against the Transfer Frame in a bitwise-AND operation to generate an
Authentication Payload.
3.4.2.3.4 SA\_sequence\_number
The SA\_sequence\_number parameter shall indicate the present value of a managed anti-
replay sequence number.
3.4.2.3.5 SA\_sequence\_window
The SA\_sequence\_window parameter shall indicate the amount of deviation the receiving
end will accept between the expected anti-replay sequence number and the sequence number
in the received frame.
3.4.2.4 Security Association Parameters Specific to Encryption
NOTE – The parameters under this subsection are applicable only if the SA\_service\_type
parameter is Encryption or Authenticated Encryption.
3.4.2.4.1 SA\_encryption\_algorithm
The SA\_encryption\_algorithm parameter shall indicate the applicable encryption algorithm
and mode of operation.
3.4.2.4.2 SA\_encryption\_key
The SA\_encryption\_key parameter shall indicate the value of a provided encryption key, or
of an index that refers to the actual key.
3.4.2.4.3 SA\_initialization\_vector
The SA\_initialization\_vector parameter shall indicate the present value of a managed
initialization vector.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 3-11
July 2022
3.4.3 SA MANAGEMENT SERVICE PRIMITIVES
This Recommended Standard specifies only the service parameters contained in the Security
Association data base and does not define specific management services or data structures
for implementation. Service directives for managing the SA parameters in-line are specified
in the CCSDS SDLS Extended Procedures Recommended Standard (reference [6]), which
may be used to provide key management, SA management, SDLS monitoring and control
services, procedures and associated protocol data units for those services, and interfaces
needed for operation of SDLS over a space link.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-1
July 2022
4 PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
4.1
PROTOCOL DATA UNITS
4.1.1 SECURITY HEADER
4.1.1.1 General
4.1.1.1.1 The presence or absence of a Security Header on a Virtual Channel or MAP shall
remain constant throughout a mission.
4.1.1.1.2
The Security Header is mandatory on a Virtual Channel or MAP whenever
authentication, encryption, or authenticated encryption is applied on that Virtual Channel or MAP.
4.1.1.1.3 The Security Header shall consist of one mandatory field and three optional
fields, positioned contiguously, in the following sequence:
a) Security Parameter Index (16 bits; mandatory);
b) Initialization Vector (octet-aligned, fixed-length for the duration of the SA; optional);
c) Sequence Number (octet-aligned, fixed-length for the duration of the SA; optional);
d) Pad Length (octet-aligned, fixed-length for the duration of the SA; optional).
4.1.1.1.4 A Security Header shall consist of less than or equal to 64 octets.
NOTES
1
The receiver will determine the presence and length of optional fields in the Security
Header by using the SPI to reference the corresponding SA.
2
The format of the Security Header is shown in figure 4-1.
SEQUENCE
NUMBER
(Optional)
(bits)
INITIALIZATION VECTOR
(Optional)
SECURITY HEADER
Managed
Managed
SECURITY
PARAMETER
INDEX
16
PAD
LENGTH
(Optional)
Managed
Figure 4-1: Security Header
4.1.1.2 Security Parameter Index
4.1.1.2.1 Bits 0-15 of the Security Header shall contain the SPI.
4.1.1.2.2 The SPI shall be used as an index to identify an SA.
4.1.1.2.3 The values of ‘all zeros’ (0) and ‘all ones’ (65535) for this field are reserved by
CCSDS for future use.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-2
July 2022
4.1.1.3 Initialization Vector
4.1.1.3.1 The Initialization Vector field shall follow the Security Parameter Index field,
without gap.
4.1.1.3.2 The Initialization Vector field shall contain the initialization vector, or an agreed-
upon portion of it, consisting of an integral number of octets.
4.1.1.3.3 The Initialization Vector field length is managed and is fixed for the duration of
the SA.
4.1.1.3.4 If an initialization vector is not required for an SA, the Initialization Vector field
shall be zero octets in length.
4.1.1.4 Sequence Number
4.1.1.4.1 The Sequence Number field shall follow the Initialization Vector field, without gap.
4.1.1.4.2 The Sequence Number field, if authentication or authenticated encryption is
selected for an SA, shall contain the anti-replay sequence number, consisting of an integral
number of octets.
NOTE – For systems that implement authenticated encryption using a simple
incrementing counter as an initialization vector (i.e., as in counter-mode
cryptographic algorithms), the Initialization Vector field of the Security Header
may serve also as the Sequence Number. In this case, the Sequence Number
field in the Security Header is zero octets in length.
4.1.1.4.3 The Sequence Number field length is managed and is fixed for the duration of
the SA.
4.1.1.4.4 If authentication or authenticated encryption is not selected for an SA, the
Sequence Number field shall be zero octets in length.
4.1.1.5 Pad Length
4.1.1.5.1 The Pad Length field shall follow the Sequence Number field, without gap.
4.1.1.5.2 The Pad Length field shall contain the count of fill bytes used in the
cryptographic process, consisting of an integral number of octets.
4.1.1.5.3 If padding is not required for an SA, the Pad Length field shall be zero octets in
length.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-3
July 2022
4.1.2 SECURITY TRAILER
4.1.2.1 The presence or absence of a Security Trailer on a Virtual Channel or MAP shall
remain constant throughout a mission.
4.1.2.2 The Security Trailer shall be present on a Virtual Channel or MAP whenever
authentication or authenticated encryption is applied on that Virtual Channel.
4.1.2.3 The Security Trailer, if present, shall consist of a MAC (octet-aligned, fixed-length
for the duration of the SA).
NOTES
1
The length of the Security Trailer is a Managed Parameter (see section 6).
2
The format of the Security Trailer is shown in figure 4-2.
(bits)
SECURITY TRAILER
MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION CODE (MAC)
(Optional)
Managed
Figure 4-2: Security Trailer
4.2
SECURITY PROTOCOL PROCEDURES
4.2.1 GENERAL
4.2.1.1 The following procedures shall be carried out to perform the operations of the
active SA.
4.2.1.2 Prior to operation of the Security Protocol, the sending and receiving ends shall
initialize a common SA data base containing all the parameters of the SAs to be used on the
link.
4.2.1.3 Synchronization of the contents of the sender’s and receiver’s SA data bases should
be maintained during operation.
NOTE – Initialization, modification, and maintenance procedures for those SA data bases
are not part of this Security Protocol but are specified in the CCSDS SDLS
Extended Procedures Recommended Standard (reference [6]).
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-4
July 2022
4.2.2 SECURITY ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
4.2.2.1 General
In order to use an SA to secure Transfer Frames on a channel, each end (both sending and
receiving end) of an SA shall:
a) create the SA;
b) associate it with cryptographic key(s);
c) associate it with the Global Virtual Channel(s) or GMAP\_IDs with which it is to be
used.
NOTES
1
It is expected that some missions will choose to define SAs statically and preload/pre-
activate them prior to the start of the mission.
2
Specifying the successful implementation of cryptographic key management is
beyond the scope of this document.
4.2.2.2 Security Association Context
4.2.2.2.1 General
Every SA shall specify one or more Global Virtual Channels or GMAP\_IDs (TC and USLP
only) with which the SA is to be used.
NOTES
1
The GVCID consists of a Master Channel ID and a Virtual Channel ID.
2
The GMAP\_ID parameter is applicable only if USLP is used on the physical channel,
or if the TC Space Data Link Protocol is used on the physical channel and Segment
Headers are used on the TC Virtual Channel. In all other cases it is invalid.
4.2.2.2.2 SA Uniqueness on Virtual Channels and MAPs
At the sending end, only one SA at a time shall be used (i.e., ‘active’) for transferring frames
over a particular Global Virtual Channel or GMAP\_ID.
4.2.2.2.3 Idle Transfer Frame Virtual Channels
SAs shall not be created for use with Virtual Channels carrying Only Idle Data (OID)
Transfer Frames as defined in references [1], [3], and [5]).
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-5
July 2022
4.2.2.3 Security Parameter Index
Every SA shall be associated with an SPI. The SPI is a transmitted value that uniquely
identifies the SA applicable to a Transfer Frame. All Transfer Frames having the same SPI
on a Master Channel share a single SA.
4.2.2.4 Security Association Service Type
Every SA shall specify one and only one of the following cryptographic functions to perform:
a) authentication;
b) encryption;
c) authenticated encryption.
NOTE – It is possible to create a ‘clear mode’ SA using one of the defined service types by
specifying the algorithm as a ‘no-op’ function (no actual cryptographic operation to
be performed). Such an SA might be used, for example, during development
testing of other aspects of data link processing before cryptographic capabilities are
available for integrated testing. In this scenario, the Security Header and Trailer
field lengths are kept constant across all supported configurations. For security
reasons, the use of such an SA is not recommended in normal operation.
4.2.2.5 Parameters Common to All SAs
Every SA shall specify the following:
a) SPI;
b) length of Initialization Vector field in Security Header;
c) length of Sequence Number field in Security Header;
d) length of Pad Length field in Security Header;
e) length of MAC field in Security Trailer.
4.2.2.6 Parameters for Authentication SAs
4.2.2.6.1 General
Every SA providing authentication shall specify the following:
a) authentication algorithm and mode of operation;
b) authentication bit mask;
c) managed anti-replay sequence number;
d) managed sequence number window.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-6
July 2022
4.2.2.6.2 Authentication Bit Mask
Every SA providing authentication shall initialize its authentication bit mask as follows:
a) the mask to be applied shall be greater or equal in length to the data extending from
the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet of the Transfer
Frame Data Field immediately preceding the MAC field in the Security Trailer;
NOTE – For variable-length TC or USLP Transfer Frames, accounting for the
largest expected frame data field will result in a mask suitable for all
Transfer Frames.
b) the mask bits corresponding to the Virtual Channel ID field of the Transfer Frame
Primary Header shall contain ‘all ones’;
c) (USLP only) the mask bits corresponding to the MAP ID field of the Transfer Frame
Primary Header shall contain ‘all ones’;
d) (TM only) the mask bits corresponding to the Master Channel Frame Count field of
the Transfer Frame Primary Header shall contain ‘all zeros’ (i.e., the field shall be
excluded from the authenticated data);
e) (AOS only) the mask bits corresponding to the optional Frame Header Error Control
field shall contain ‘all zeros’ (i.e., the field shall be excluded from the authenticated
data);
f) (TC only) the mask bits corresponding to the Segment Header shall contain ‘all
ones’;
g) (AOS and USLP only) the mask bits corresponding to the Insert Zone shall contain
‘all zeros’ (i.e., the field shall be excluded from the authenticated data);
h) the mask bits corresponding to the Security Header, except for the mask bits
corresponding to the Initialization Vector field, shall contain ‘all ones’;
i) the mask bits corresponding to the Frame Data Field shall contain ‘all ones’;
j) the mask bits corresponding to all other Transfer Frame header fields should contain
‘all zeros’, unless otherwise specified according to mission requirements.
NOTES
1
Missions desiring to authenticate other fields (e.g., Spacecraft ID, TM Frame
Secondary Header) can include them among the authenticated data merely by
selecting an authentication mask that overrides the defaults listed in paragraph j)
above. Possible security concerns affecting the selection of an authentication mask
are discussed in reference [D3].
2
If the Master (not Virtual) Channel Frame Secondary Header Service (TM only) is
used, the TM Frame Secondary Header is excluded from the authenticated data.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-7
July 2022
4.2.2.7 Parameters for Encryption SAs
Every SA providing encryption shall specify the following:
a) encryption algorithm and mode of operation;
NOTE – The chosen algorithm and mode also imply other attributes, such as the
required block size and the corresponding need to pad undersized data
blocks.
b) managed initialization vector.
4.2.2.8 Parameters for Authenticated Encryption SAs
Every SA providing authenticated encryption shall specify everything required in both
4.2.2.6 and 4.2.2.7 above.
4.2.3 SENDING PROCEDURES
4.2.3.1 Overview
This subsection describes procedures at the sending end when a Space Data Link Protocol
entity calls the ApplySecurity function for a frame as shown in figures 2-3, 2-4, and 2-5.
(See 3.2 for the definition of the interface for the ApplySecurity function.)
4.2.3.2 General
4.2.3.2.1 When the ApplySecurity function is called, the function shall use the GVCID
parameter, and the GMAP\_ID parameter if applicable, to determine the Security Association
that applies to the frame.
4.2.3.2.2 The actions of the ApplySecurity function shall depend on the Security Type of
the Security Association as follows:
4.2.3.2.2.1 When the Security Type is encryption:
a) the encryption operations specified in 4.2.3.3 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ApplySecurity Payload parameter;
b) the Security Header shall be completed;
c) the Security Header and the encrypted Transfer Frame Data Field shall be returned in
the ApplySecurity Return parameter.
4.2.3.2.2.2 When the Security Type is authentication:
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-8
July 2022
a) the authentication operations specified in 4.2.3.4 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ApplySecurity Payload parameter;
b) the Security Header, the unencrypted Transfer Frame Data Field, and the Security
Trailer shall be returned in the ApplySecurity Return parameter.
4.2.3.2.2.3 When the Security Type is authenticated encryption:
a) If the cryptographic algorithm requires both plaintext and Additional Authenticated
Data (AAD) as separate inputs, then:
1) the plaintext shall be the Transfer Frame Data Field, and
2) the AAD shall be the portion from the first octet of the Authentication Payload to
the octet immediately preceding the Transfer Frame Data Field;
NOTE – This definitional distinction is common to a class of cryptographic
algorithms known as ‘Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data’
(AEAD) algorithms.
b) the encryption operations specified in 4.2.3.3 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ApplySecurity Payload parameter;
c) the authentication operations specified in 4.2.3.4 shall be applied to the partial frame
resulting from the encryption operations;
d) the Security Header, the encrypted Transfer Frame Data Field, and the Security
Trailer shall be returned in the ApplySecurity Return parameter.
4.2.3.3 Encryption Operations
If encryption is selected for an SA, then for each transmitted frame belonging to that SA, the
sender shall:
a) encrypt the Transfer Frame Data Field;
b) if the algorithm and mode selected for the SA require the use of fill padding, place the
number of fill bytes used into the Pad Length field of the Security Header.
4.2.3.4 Authentication Operations
If authentication is selected for an SA, then for each transmitted frame belonging to that SA,
the sender shall:
a) increment the SA’s managed sequence number by one;
b) place the managed sequence number in the Sequence Number field of the Security
Header, unless that SA specifies use of the Initialization Vector field of the Security
Header instead;
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-9
July 2022
NOTE – The interpretation of a sequence number rollover (to zero) is mission-
specific. Possible interpretations and problems linked with this rollover are
discussed in reference [D3].
c) complete the Security Header as specified in 4.1.1;
d) apply the SA’s authentication bit mask in a bitwise-AND operation against the partial
frame, thus resulting in the Authentication Payload;
NOTE – The partial frame supplied in the ApplySecurity Payload consists of the
portion from the start of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the end of the
Transfer Frame Data Field. The result is used for the masking operation.
e) compute a MAC over the Authentication Payload;
f) (if necessary) truncate the least-significant bits of the computed MAC, such that the
result is of identical length to the MAC field in the Security Trailer;
g) place the computed MAC in the Security Trailer;
h) if the algorithm and mode selected for the SA require the use of fill padding, place the
number of fill bytes used into the Pad Length field of the Security Header.
4.2.4 RECEIVING PROCEDURES
4.2.4.1 Overview
This subsection describes procedures at the receiving end when a Space Data Link Protocol
entity calls the ProcessSecurity function for a frame. (See 3.3 for the definition of the
interface for the ProcessSecurity function.)
The parameters containing partial frames described in this subsection are defined in an
abstract sense and are not intended to imply any particular implementation approach for the
handling of frames or for the transfer of frame data between the Space Data Link Protocol
entity and the Security Protocol entity.
4.2.4.2 General
4.2.4.2.1 When the ProcessSecurity function is called, the function shall verify the Security
Association that applies to the frame as specified in 4.2.4.3.
4.2.4.2.2 If the verification of the Security Association fails, the ProcessSecurity function
shall exit, giving an indication of the failure in the Verification Status and Verification Status
Code return parameters.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-10
July 2022
4.2.4.2.3 If the verification of the Security Association succeeds, the actions of the
ProcessSecurity function shall depend on the Security Type of the Security Association as
follows:
4.2.4.2.3.1 When the Security Type is authentication:
a) the authentication operations specified in 4.2.4.4 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter;
b) the Verification Status and Verification Status Code parameters shall be set, and the
ProcessSecurity function shall exit if an authentication failure is detected;
c) the Transfer Frame Data Field in the ProcessSecurity Return parameter and a success
indication in the Verification Status shall be returned, and the ProcessSecurity
function shall exit if no authentication failure is detected.
4.2.4.2.3.2 When the Security Type is authenticated encryption:
a) If the cryptographic algorithm requires both plaintext and AAD as separate inputs,
then:
1) the plaintext shall be the Transfer Frame Data Field, and
2) the AAD shall be the portion from the first octet of the Authentication Payload to
the octet immediately preceding the Transfer Frame Data Field;
NOTE – This definitional distinction is common to a class of cryptographic
algorithms known as AEAD algorithms.
b) the authentication operations specified in 4.2.4.4 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter;
c) the Verification Status and Verification Status Code parameters shall be set, and the
ProcessSecurity function shall exit if an authentication failure was detected;
d) the encryption operations specified in 4.2.4.5 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter;
e) the decrypted Transfer Frame Data Field in the ProcessSecurity Return parameter and
a success indication in the Verification Status shall be returned, and the
ProcessSecurity function shall exit.
4.2.4.2.3.3 When the Security Type is encryption:
a) the encryption operations specified in 4.2.4.5 shall be applied to the partial frame
contained in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter;
b) the decrypted Transfer Frame Data Field in the ProcessSecurity Return parameter and
a success indication in the Verification Status shall be returned, and the
ProcessSecurity function shall exit.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-11
July 2022
4.2.4.3 Security Association Verification
For all frames received over a Global Virtual Channel, the receiver shall:
a) if the received frame has a Security Header, verify that the SA referenced in its SPI is
associated with that Global Virtual Channel and/or GMAP\_ID;
b) report an exception to the service user for frames in which the received frame fails
SA verification, and discard those frames.
NOTE – Discarded frames can be archived for forensic investigation if desired.
4.2.4.4 Authentication Operations
If authentication is selected for an SA, then for each received frame belonging to that SA, the
receiver shall:
a) apply the SA’s authentication bit mask in a bitwise-AND operation against the
portion of the partial Transfer Frame in the ProcessSecurity Payload parameter,
extending from the first octet of the Transfer Frame Primary Header to the last octet
of the Transfer Frame Data Field immediately preceding the MAC field in the
Security Trailer, thus resulting in the Authentication Payload;
b) compute a MAC over the Authentication Payload;
c) (if necessary) truncate the least-significant bits of the computed MAC, such that the
result is of identical length to the MAC field in the Security Trailer;
d) verify that the computed MAC matches the MAC received in the Security Trailer;
e) report an exception to the service user for frames in which the received frame fails
MAC verification and discard those frames;
NOTE – Discarded frames can be archived for forensic investigation if desired.
f) extract the received sequence number from either the Sequence Number field or the
Initialization Vector field of the Security Header, according to the options specified
for that SA;
g) compare the received sequence number to the managed sequence number;
h) report an exception to the service user for frames in which the received sequence
number is lower or equal to the managed sequence number (i.e., the value stored in
the receiver), and discard those frames;
i) report an exception to the service user for frames in which the received sequence
number is larger than the managed sequence number by a value greater than the
window defined for that SA, and discard those frames;
NOTE – Discarded frames can be archived for forensic investigation if desired.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 4-12
July 2022
j) only upon receipt of frames that pass the verification operations a)–i) above, replace
the managed sequence number with the received sequence number;
NOTE – The interpretation of a sequence number rollover (to zero) is mission-
specific. Possible interpretations and problems linked with this rollover are
discussed in reference [D3].
k) (optionally) if specified for that SA, extract the count of fill bytes used from the Pad
Length field of the Security Header and remove those fill bytes from the Frame Data
Field to be returned.
4.2.4.5 Encryption Operations
If encryption is selected for an SA, then for each received frame belonging to that SA, the
receiver shall:
a) decrypt the Transfer Frame Data Field;
b) (optionally) if specified for that SA, extract the count of fill bytes used from the Pad
Length field of the Security Header, and remove those fill bytes from the Frame Data
Field to be returned.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 5-1
July 2022
5 USE OF THE SERVICES WITH CCSDS PROTOCOLS
5.1
TM PROTOCOL
The following restrictions apply to use of the Security Protocol with TM:
a) the Packet and VCA Services may be used on a Global Virtual Channel with the
Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Service and are protected
by each of these services;
b) the VC\_FSH Service may be used on a Global Virtual Channel with the
Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Service and may be
protected by authentication but is not protected by encryption;
c) the VC\_OCF, VCF, MC\_FSH, MC\_OCF, and MCF Services are not protected by the
Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Services but may be used
on the same Master Channel.
NOTE – The format of the TM Transfer Frame is defined in reference [1]. The format of
a TM Transfer Frame using the Security Protocol is shown in figure 5-1.
TRANSFER
FRAME
PRIMARY
HEADER
(octets)
6
TM TRANSFER FRAME
FRAME DATA
OCF
(Optional)
4
SECONDARY
HEADER
(Optional)
2-64
MAC is computed over Primary Header, Secondary Header, Security Header, and Frame Data.
MAC is not computed over ASM (not shown), OCF, or ECF.
Encryption is done on Frame Data only.
SECURITY
HEADER
SECURITY
TRAILER
(Optional)
ECF
(Optional)
2
TM ApplySecurity Payload
Figure 5-1: TM Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol
5.2
TC PROTOCOL
The following restrictions apply to use of the Security Protocol with TC:
a) the MAPP, MAPA, VCP, and VCA Services may be used on a Global Virtual
Channel with the Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Service
and are protected by each of these services;
b) the COP Management (see references [D11] and [D10]), VCF, and MCF Services
are not protected by the Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption
Services but may be used on the same Master Channel;
c) each SA shall be associated with one VC and one VC only.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 5-2
July 2022
NOTE – The format of the TC Transfer Frame is defined in reference [2]. The format of a
TC Transfer Frame using the Security Protocol is shown in figure 5-2.
TRANSFER
FRAME
PRIMARY
HEADER
(octets)
5
FRAME DATA
TC TRANSFER FRAME
SEGMENT
HEADER
1
MAC is computed over Primary Header, Segment Header, Security Header, and Frame Data.
MAC is not computed over CLTU Start Sequence (not shown) or ECF.
Encryption is done on Frame Data only.
SECURITY
HEADER
SECURITY
TRAILER
(Optional)
ECF
(Optional)
2
TC ApplySecurity Payload
Figure 5-2: TC Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol
5.3
AOS PROTOCOL
The following restrictions apply to use of the Security Protocol with AOS:
a) the Packet, Bitstream, and VCA Services may be used on a Global Virtual Channel
with the Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Services and are
protected by each of these services;
b) the VC\_OCF Service, VCF, MCF, and Insert Services are not protected by the
Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Services but may be used
on the same Master Channel.
NOTE – The format of the AOS Transfer Frame is defined in reference [3]. The format of
an AOS Transfer Frame using the Security Protocol is shown in figure 5-3.
TRANSFER
FRAME
PRIMARY
HEADER
(octets)
6-8
FRAME DATA
OCF
(Optional)
4
AOS TRANSFER FRAME
INSERT
ZONE
(Optional)
Managed
MAC is computed over Primary Header, Security Header, and Frame Data. Insert Zone is masked out.
MAC is not computed over ASM (not shown), OCF, or ECF.
Encryption is done on Frame Data only.
SECURITY
HEADER
SECURITY
TRAILER
(Optional)
ECF
(Optional)
2
AOS ApplySecurity Payload
Figure 5-3: AOS Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 5-3
July 2022
5.4
USLP
The following restrictions apply to use of the Security Protocol with USLP:
a) the MAP Packet, MAP Octet Stream, and MAP Access Services may be used on a
GMAP with the Authentication, Encryption, or Authenticated-Encryption Services
and are protected by each of these services;
b) the COPs Management Service (see references [D11] and [D10]), MC\_OCF Service,
VCF, MCF, and Insert Services are not protected by the Authentication, Encryption,
or Authenticated-Encryption Services but may be used on the same Master Channel;
c) each SA shall be associated with one VC and one VC only if COPs are used (see
references [D11] and [D10]).
NOTE – The format of the USLP Transfer Frame is defined in reference [5]. The format
of a USLP Transfer Frame using the Security Protocol is shown in figure 5-4.
TRANSFER
FRAME
PRIMARY
HEADER
(octets)
4–14
TRANSFER FRAME DATA FIELD
OCF
(Optional)
4
USLP TRANSFER FRAME
INSERT
ZONE
(Optional)
Managed
MAC is computed over Primary Header, Security Header, and Frame Data. Insert Zone is masked out.
MAC is not computed over ASM (not shown), OCF, or ECF.
Encryption is done on Transfer Frame Data Filed only.
SECURITY
HEADER
SECURITY
TRAILER
(Optional)
ECF
(Optional)
2 or 4
USLP ApplySecurity Payload
Figure 5-4: USLP Transfer Frame Using the Security Protocol
5.5
SUMMARY OF PROTOCOL SERVICES
Table 5-1 provides a summary of which services of the supported Space Data Link Protocols
may be protected using the service functions of the Security Protocol.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 5-4
July 2022
Table 5-1: Summary of Protocol and Services Support
Space Data
Link Protocol
Service
Authentication
Encryption
Authenticated
Encryption
TM
Packet
Protected
Protected
Protected
VCA
Protected
Protected
Protected
VC\_FSH
Protected
Not protected
Authentication only
VC\_OCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
VCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MC\_FSH
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MC\_OCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
TC
MAPP
Protected
Protected
Protected
MAPA
Protected
Protected
Protected
VCP
Protected
Protected
Protected
VCA
Protected
Protected
Protected
COP Management
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
VCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
AOS
Packet
Protected
Protected
Protected
Bitstream
Protected
Protected
Protected
VCA
Protected
Protected
Protected
VC\_OCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
VCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
Insert
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
USLP
MAPP
Protected
Protected
Protected
MAPA
Protected
Protected
Protected
MAP Octet Stream
Protected
Protected
Protected
USLP\_MC\_OCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
VCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
MCF
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
Insert
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
COPs Management
Not protected
Not protected
Not protected
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 6-1
July 2022
6 MANAGED PARAMETERS
6.1
OVERVIEW
In order to conserve bandwidth on the space link, certain parameters associated with the
Security Protocol are handled by management rather than by inline communications
protocol. The managed parameters are generally those which tend to be static for long
periods of time and whose change signifies a major reconfiguration of the service provider
associated with a particular mission. These managed parameters are intended to be included
in any service-provider system that manages SAs. A set of procedures to manage Security
Associations and Keys is specified in reference [6].
6.2
REQUIREMENTS
6.2.1 The managed parameters used for the Security Protocol shall be those listed in
table 6-1.
NOTES
1
These parameters are defined in an abstract sense, and are not intended to imply any
particular implementation of a management system.
2
The majority of managed parameters are the parameters of the SA data base managed
by both the sending and receiving ends, which must match one another in order to
operate correctly.
6.2.2 All managed parameters of the Space Data Link Protocol (see references [1], [2], [3],
and [5]) used on the physical channel shall be treated as also applicable to the Security
Protocol.
Table 6-1: Managed Parameters for Security Protocol
Managed Parameter
Allowed Values
Defined In
Reference
Security Association Data Base Parameters Held Static
for the Duration of the Applicable SA
Security Parameter Index (SPI)
1-65534
Security Association Service Type
(indicates which cryptographic operations
are performed for an SA)
Authentication
Encryption
Authenticated Encryption
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 6-2
July 2022
Managed Parameter
Allowed Values
Defined In
Reference
Security Association Context
(identifies the GVCIDs or GMAP\_IDs with
which an SA is used)
GVCID
GMAP\_ID
[1], [2], [3],
[5]
[2], [5]
Transmitted length of Initialization Vector
(if used) (SA\_length\_IV)
1-32 octets
Transmitted length of Sequence Number (if
used) (SA\_length\_SN)
2-8 octets
Transmitted length of Pad Length (if used)
(SA\_length\_PL)
1-2 octets
Transmitted length of MAC (if used)
(SA\_length\_MAC)
8-64 octets
Authentication algorithm
HMAC, CMAC, GMAC,
GCM, Agency-specific
[4]
Authentication mask
Bit mask
Sequence number window
Integer greater than zero (> 0)
Encryption algorithm
AES/Counter Mode, GCM,
Agency-specific
[4]
Security Association Data Base Parameters Held Static
While the Applicable SA Is Active on the Channel
Authentication key
Length (in bits): Algorithm-
specific
Value (Binary)
[4]
Encryption key
Length (in bits): Algorithm-
specific
Value (Binary)
[4]
Security Association Data Base Parameters That Vary Dynamically
While the Applicable SA Is Active on the Channel
Sequence number
(sender’s next frame value, receiver’s
expected value).
Integer
Encryption initialization vector
(sender’s current value)
Algorithm-specific
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 6-3
July 2022
NOTE – This table has been built using the authentication and encryption algorithms
allowed by the current version of reference [4]. As such, the allowed values for
the Authentication/Encryption Algorithms and for Key Length refer to those in
the current version of reference [4], and users of this document are encouraged to
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of that publication.
Moreover, as the protocol defined in this book is quite independent from the
applied algorithms, users would still be able, if needed, to apply this protocol
with other algorithms defined via bilateral agreement (out of CCSDS scope)
among agencies. This is shown by the ‘Agency-Specific’ value.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page 7-1
July 2022
7 CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
An implementer of the Security Protocol shall verify conformance with this Recommended
Standard by completing a Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS) based on
a CCSDS-defined PICS proforma for the protocol.
NOTE – A compliant PICS proforma is provided in annex A of this document.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-1
July 2022
ANNEX A
PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION CONFORMANCE
STATEMENT PROFORMA
(NORMATIVE)
A1 INTRODUCTION
A1.1 OVERVIEW
To evaluate conformance of a particular implementation, it is necessary to have a statement of
which capabilities and options have been implemented for a given protocol specification. Such
a statement is called a Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS). This annex
provides the PICS proforma for the Space Data Link Security Protocol in compliance with the
relevant requirements, and in accordance with the relevant guidance given in ISO/IEC 9646-7.
A1.2 CONFORMANCE TO THIS PICS PROFORMA
If it is claimed to conform to this Recommended Standard, the actual PICS proforma to be
filled in by a supplier shall be technically equivalent to the text of the PICS proforma in this
annex, and shall preserve the numbering/naming and ordering of the PICS proforma items.
A PICS that conforms to this Recommended Standard shall be a conforming PICS proforma
completed in accordance with the instructions for completion given in A2.
A1.3 COPYRIGHT
Users of this Recommended Standard may freely reproduce this PICS proforma so that it can
be used for its intended purpose and may further publish the completed PICS.
A2 INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE PICS PROFORMA
A2.1 OVERVIEW
In order to reduce the size of tables in the PICS proforma, notations have been introduced
that have allowed the use of a multi-column layout, in which the columns are headed ‘Status’
and ‘Support’. The definition of each of these follows.
A2.2 STATUS COLUMN
The ‘Status’ column indicates the level of support required for conformance to the standard.
The values are as follows:
M
Mandatory (support is required).
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-2
July 2022
O
Optional support is permitted for conformance to the standard. If implemented, it
must conform to the specifications and restrictions contained in the standard.
These restrictions may affect the optionality of other items.
O.n
The item is optional, but support of at least one of the options labeled with the
same number n is mandatory. The definitions for the qualification statements
used in this annex are written under the tables in which they appear.
C.n
The item is conditional (where n is the number that identifies the applicable
condition). The definitions for the conditional statements used in this annex are
written under the tables in which they appear.
n/a
The item is not applicable.
A2.3 SUPPORT COLUMN
The ‘Support’ column shall be completed by the supplier or implementer to indicate the level
of implementation of each feature. The proforma has been designed such that the only entries
required in the ‘Support’ column are:
Y
Yes, the feature has been implemented.
N
No, the feature has not been implemented.
–
The item is not applicable.
A2.4 ITEM REFERENCE NUMBERS
Each line within the PICS proforma that requires implementation detail to be entered is
numbered at the left-hand edge of the line. This numbering is included as a means of
uniquely identifying all possible implementation details within the PICS proforma. The need
for such unique referencing has been identified by the testing bodies.
The means of referencing individual responses should be to specify the following sequence:
a) a reference to the smallest subsection enclosing the relevant item;
b) a solidus character, ‘/’;
c) the reference number of the row in which the response appears;
d) if, and only if, more than one response occurs in the row identified by the reference
number, then each possible entry is implicitly labeled a, b, c, etc., from left to right,
and this letter is appended to the sequence.
An example of the use of this notation would be A4/1, which refers to the SDLS
implementation’s support for the TM Space Data Link Protocol.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-3
July 2022
A2.5 COMPLETION OF THE PICS
The implementer shall complete all entries in the column marked ‘Support’. In certain
clauses of the PICS proforma further guidance for completion may be necessary. Such
guidance shall supplement the guidance given in this clause and shall have a scope restricted
to the clause in which it appears. In addition, other specifically identified information shall
be provided by the implementer as requested. No changes shall be made to the proforma
except the completion as required. Recognizing that the level of detail required may in some
instances exceed the space available for responses, a number of responses specifically allow
for the addition of appendices to the PICS.
A3 GENERAL INFORMATION
A3.1 REFERENCED BASE STANDARDS
The SDLS Protocol (this Recommended Standard) is the only base standard referenced in
this PICS proforma. In the tables below, numbers in the Reference column refer to
applicable subsections within this document.
A3.2 IDENTIFICATION OF THE PICS
Date of statement (yyyy-mm-dd)
PICS version
System Conformance Statement cross-reference
Other information
NOTE – The System Conformance Statement is identified in ISO/IEC 9646-7
(reference [D9]). It contains a declaration of the layers of the Reference Model
covered by the implementation to be tested.
A3.3 IDENTIFICATION OF THE SYSTEM SUPPLIER AND/OR
TEST LABORATORY CLIENT
Organization name
Contact name
Address
Telephone
E-mail
Other information
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-4
July 2022
A3.4 IDENTIFICATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION UNDER TEST
Implementation name
Implementation version
Machine name
Machine version
Operating system name
Operating system version
Special configuration
Other information
A3.5 IDENTIFICATION OF THE PROTOCOL
Protocol specification / version
Technical corrigenda implemented
Other amendments implemented (explain)
A3.6 GLOBAL STATEMENT OF CONFORMANCE
Are all mandatory features implemented? (Yes or No)
NOTE – If a ‘No’ answer is given to this question, then the implementation does not conform
to the SDLS standard. Non-supported mandatory capabilities are to be identified in
the PICS, with an explanation of why the implementation is non-conforming.
Non-conforming capabilities (explain)
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-5
July 2022
A4 SUPPORTED SPACE DATA LINK PROTOCOLS
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
TM Space Data Link Protocol
Reference [1]
O.1
2
TC Space Data Link Protocol
Reference [2]
O.1
3
AOS Space Data Link Protocol
Reference [3]
O.1
4
Unified Space Data Link Protocol
Reference [5]
O.1
O.1:
Support for at least one of [ A4/1 | A4/2 | A4/3 | A4/4 ] is M
A5 SUPPORTED SECURITY SERVICES
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
Encryption
4.2.2.4
O.2
2
Authentication
4.2.2.4
O.2
3
Authenticated Encryption
4.2.2.4
O.2
O.2:
Support for at least one of [ A5/1 | A5/2 | A5/3 ] is M
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-6
July 2022
A6 SECURITY ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT DATA
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
GVCID
3.4.2.2.1
4.2.2.2.1
M
2
GMAP\_ID
3.4.2.2.2
4.2.2.2.1
C.1
3
SPI
3.4.2.2.3
4.2.2.3
M
4
SA\_service\_type
3.4.2.2.4
4.2.2.4
M
5
SA\_length\_SN
3.4.2.2.5
4.2.2.5 c)
M
6
SA\_length\_IV
3.4.2.2.6
4.2.2.5 b)
M
7
SA\_length\_PL
3.4.2.2.7
4.2.2.5 d)
M
8
SA\_length\_MAC
3.4.2.2.8
4.2.2.5 e)
M
9
SA\_authentication\_algorithm
3.4.2.3.1
4.2.2.6.1 a)
C.2
10
SA\_authentication\_key
3.4.2.3.2
C.2
11
SA\_authentication\_mask
3.4.2.3.3
4.2.2.6.1 b)
4.2.2.6.2
C.2
12
SA\_sequence\_number
3.4.2.3.4
4.2.2.6.1 c)
C.2
13
SA\_sequence\_window
3.4.2.3.5
4.2.2.6.1 d)
C.2
14
SA\_encryption\_algorithm
3.4.2.4
4.2.2.7 a)
C.3
15
SA\_encryption\_key
3.4.2.4.2
C.3
16
SA\_initialization\_vector
3.4.2.4.3
4.2.2.7 b)
C.4
C.1:
if [ A4/2 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.2:
if [ A5/2 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.3:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.4:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else O
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-7
July 2022
A7 SERVICE PRIMITIVES
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Sender
Receiver
Status
Support
Status
Support
1
ApplySecurity
3.2.1
M
n/a
2
ProcessSecurity
3.3.1
n/a
M
A7.1 SECURITY FUNCTIONS
A7.1.1 ApplySecurity (Sending)
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
TM ApplySecurity Payload
3.2.2.2
C.5
2
TC ApplySecurity Payload
3.2.2.3
C.1
3
AOS ApplySecurity Payload
3.2.2.4
C.6
4
USLP ApplySecurity Payload
3.2.2.5
C.7
5
GVCID
3.2.2.5
M
6
GMAP\_ID
3.2.2.7
C.1
7
AEAD algorithms’ plaintext
4.2.3.2.2.3 a) 1)
C.8
8
AEAD algorithms’ AAD
4.2.3.2.2.3 a) 2)
C.8
9
Encrypt frame data
4.2.3.3 a)
C.3
10
Put length of pad in header
4.2.3.3 b)
O
11
Increment SN
4.2.3.4 a)
C.2
12
Put SN in header
4.2.3.4 b)
C.2
13
Get Authentication Payload data
4.2.3.4 c)
C.2
14
Apply mask
4.2.3.4 d)
C.2
15
Compute MAC
4.2.3.4 e)
C.2
16
Truncate MAC
4.2.3.4 f)
O
17
Put MAC in trailer
4.2.3.4 g)
C.2
18
Return status to caller
3.2.3
M
C.1:
if [ A4/2 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.2:
if [ A5/2 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.3:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.5:
if [ A4/1 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.6:
if [ A4/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.7:
if [ A4/4 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.8:
if [ A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-8
July 2022
A7.1.2 ProcessSecurity (Receiving)
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
TM ProcessSecurity Payload
3.3.2.2
C.5
2
TC ProcessSecurity Payload
3.3.2.3
C.1
3
AOS ProcessSecurity Payload
3.3.2.4
C.6
4
USLP ProcessSecurity Payload
3.3.2.5
C.7
5
GVCID
3.3.2.5
M
6
GMAP\_ID
3.3.2.7
C.1
7
Discard frames with wrong SA
and report exceptions
4.2.4.3
M
8
AEAD algorithms’ plaintext
4.2.4.2.3.2 a) 1)
C.8
9
AEAD algorithms’ AAD
4.2.4.2.3.2 a) 2)
C.8
10
Get Authentication Payload data
4.2.4.4 a)
C.2
11
Apply mask
4.2.4.4 a)
C.2
12
Compute MAC
4.2.4.4 b)
C.2
13
Truncate computed MAC
4.2.4.4 c)
O
14
Compare to received MAC
4.2.4.4 d)
C.2
15
Report MAC exceptions
4.2.4.4 e)
C.2
16
Discard frames with bad MAC
4.2.4.4 e)
C.2
17
Archive rejected-MAC frames
4.2.4.4 e)
O
18
Read received SN
4.2.4.4 f)
C.2
19
Compare to managed SN
4.2.4.4 g)
C.2
20
Report SN exceptions
4.2.4.4 i)
C.2
21
Discard frames with bad SN
4.2.4.4 i)
4.2.4.4 i)
C.2
22
Archive rejected-SN frames
4.2.4.4 i)
4.2.4.4 i)
O
23
Update managed SN
4.2.4.4 j)
C.2
24
Remove trailer
4.2.4.4
C.2
25
Decrypt frame data
4.2.4.5 a)
C.3
26
Remove header
4.2.4.5 b)
M
27
Return status to caller
–
M
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page A-9
July 2022
C.1:
if [ A4/2 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.2:
if [ A5/2 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.3:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.5:
if [ A4/1 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.6:
if [ A4/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.7:
if [ A4/4 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.8:
if [ A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
A8 PROTOCOL DATA UNITS
A8.1 SECURITY HEADER
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
SPI
4.1.1.1.3 a)
4.1.1.2
M
2
IV
4.1.1.1.3 b)
4.1.1.3
C.4
3
SN
4.1.1.1.3 c)
4.1.1.4
C.2
4
PL
4.1.1.1.3 d)
4.1.1.5
C.3
5
Max length
4.1.1.1.4
M
C.2:
if [ A5/2 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.3:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else n/a
C.4:
if [ A5/1 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else O
A8.2 SECURITY TRAILER
Item
Protocol Feature
Reference
Status
Support
1
MAC
4.1.2.1
C.9
C.9:
if [ A5/2 | A5/3 ] is supported then M, else O
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page B-1
July 2022
ANNEX B
SECURITY, SANA, AND PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
(INFORMATIVE)
B1
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
B1.1
INTRODUCTION
Communications security attempts to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and/or authenticity
of transmitted data, as required depending on the threat, the mission security policy(s), and
the desire of the mission planners. It is possible for a single data unit to require all three of
these security attributes to ensure that the transmitted data is not disclosed, not altered, and
not spoofed.
B1.2
SECURITY CONCERNS
Security concerns specific to the Security Protocol design are addressed in more detail in
reference [D2].
It may be necessary to apply security services at multiple layers within the protocol stack, to
account for distributed processing and cross-support, to account for different classes of data
or end users, or to account for protection of data during unprotected portions of the complete
end-to-end transmission (e.g., across ground networks). The specification of security
services at other layers is outside the scope of this document.
References [D6] and [D7] contain more information regarding the choice of services and
where they can be implemented. Reference [4] contains more information regarding the
choice of particular cryptographic algorithms.
B1.3
POTENTIAL THREATS AND ATTACK SCENARIOS
The Security Protocol provides no protection against denial-of-service attacks against the
communications channel, such as radio-frequency jamming.
The Security Protocol provides no protection against traffic flow analysis. When encryption
is used, a careful choice of algorithm and mode will provide protection to the Transfer Frame
Data Field, but an attacker can use the Spacecraft ID, Virtual Channel ID, TC MAP ID, OCF,
or COP control directives (see references [D11] and [D10]) as metadata for inferring
information about the parties communicating and possibly the nature or status of their
communications.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page B-2
July 2022
The Security Protocol provides no cryptographic key management protocol. Specifying the
successful implementation of cryptographic key management or operational key change criteria
is beyond the scope of this document. (See references [D3] and [D8] for more information.)
The Security Protocol provides no protection to TC or USLP COP control commands nor to
COP-1 CLCW or COP-P PLCW status information returned in the OCF; an attacker could
use false COP control directives or OCF contents to interfere with a communications session
(see references [D11] and [D10]).
The Security Protocol foresees the existence of a ‘clear mode’ for certain VCs. If a ‘clear
mode’ is implemented, the conditions under which, and by which, it is activated should be
carefully analyzed, as those might introduce major security vulnerabilities.
If encryption is implemented without authentication, the Security Protocol provides no
protection against data substitution attacks. In addition, it may be possible for an attacker to
reverse-engineer the encryption key and compromise data confidentiality, if portions of the
original plaintext are predictable.
Specific potential threats and attack scenarios are addressed in more detail in reference [D2].
B1.4
CONSEQUENCES OF NOT APPLYING SECURITY
Without authentication, unauthorized commands or software might be uploaded to a
spacecraft or data received from a source masquerading as the spacecraft. Without data
integrity, corrupted commands or software might be uploaded to a spacecraft, potentially
resulting in the loss of the mission, harm to people and property, or loss of life (especially in
the case of a crewed mission). Without data integrity, corrupted telemetry might be retrieved
from a spacecraft, which could result in an incorrect course of action being taken. If
confidentiality is not implemented, data flowing to or from a spacecraft might be visible to
unauthorized entities, resulting in disclosure of sensitive or private information.
B2
SANA CONSIDERATIONS
This Recommended Standard defines no new information registries. The recommendations
of this document do not require any action from SANA.
B3
PATENT CONSIDERATIONS
At the time of publication, CCSDS was not aware of any claimed patent rights applicable to
implementing the provisions of this Recommended Standard.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page C-1
July 2022
ANNEX C
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
(INFORMATIVE)
Term
Meaning
AAD
additional authenticated data
AEAD
authenticated encryption with associated data
AES
Advanced Encryption Standard
AOS
Advanced Orbiting Systems
ASM
attached sync mark
CLCW
communications link control word
CLTU
communications link transmission unit
CMAC
cipher-based message authentication code
COP
communications operation procedure
ECF
error control field
EP
(SDLS) Extended Procedures
GCM
Galois/Counter Mode
GMAP
global multiplexer access point
GMAP\_ID
global multiplexer access point identifier
GVCID
global virtual channel identifier
IV
initialization vector
MAC
message authentication code
MAP
multiplexer access point
MAPA
multiplexer access point access
MAPP
multiplexer access point packet
MC
master channel
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page C-2
July 2022
Term
Meaning
MCF
master channel frame
MC\_FSH
master channel frame secondary header
MC\_OCF
master channel operational control field
OCF
operational control field
PLCW
Proximity link control word
RF
radio frequency
SA
security association
SANA
Space Assigned Numbers Authority
SDLS
Space Data Link Security
SLE
Space Link Extension
SPI
Security Parameter Index
TC
telecommand
TM
telemetry
USLP
Unified Space Data Link Protocol
VC
virtual channel
VC\_FSH
virtual channel frame secondary header
VC\_OCF
virtual channel operational control field
VCA
virtual channel access
VCA\_SDU
virtual channel access service data unit
VCF
virtual channel frame
VCP
virtual channel packet
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page D-1
July 2022
ANNEX D
INFORMATIVE REFERENCES
(INFORMATIVE)
[D1]
Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference Model:
The Basic Model. 2nd ed. International Standard, ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. Geneva:
ISO, 1994.
[D2]
Information Processing Systems—Open Systems Interconnection—Basic Reference
Model—Part 2: Security Architecture. International Standard, ISO 7498-2:1989.
Geneva: ISO, 1989.
[D3]
Space Data Link Security Protocol—Summary of Concept and Rationale. Issue 1.
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 350.5-G-1.
Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, June 2018.
[D4]
Overview of Space Communications Protocols. Issue 3. Report Concerning Space
Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 130.0-G-3. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, July 2014.
[D5]
TM Synchronization and Channel Coding. Issue 4. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 131.0-B-4. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, April
2022.
[D6]
The Application of Security to CCSDS Protocols. Issue 3. Report Concerning Space
Data System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 350.0-G-3. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, March 2019.
[D7]
Security Architecture for Space Data Systems. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space
Data System Practices (Magenta Book), CCSDS 351.0-M-1. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, November 2012.
[D8]
Space Missions Key Management Concept. Issue 1. Report Concerning Space Data
System Standards (Green Book), CCSDS 350.6-G-1. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
November 2011.
[D9]
Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Conformance Testing
Methodology and Framework—Part 7: Implementation Conformance Statements.
International Standard, ISO/IEC 9646-7:1995. Geneva: ISO, 1995.
[D10] Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol—Data Link Layer. Issue 6. Recommendation for
Space Data System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 211.0-B-6. Washington, D.C.:
CCSDS, July 2020.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page D-2
July 2022
[D11] Communications Operation Procedure-1. Issue 2. Recommendation for Space Data
System Standards (Blue Book), CCSDS 232.1-B-2. Washington, D.C.: CCSDS,
September 2010.
NOTE – Normative references are listed in 1.8.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page E-1
July 2022
ANNEX E
BASELINE IMPLEMENTATION MODE
(INFORMATIVE)
E1
BASELINE MODE FOR USE WITH TM
E1.1
ALGORITHM
The baseline implementation to be used for interoperability testing and operation is
authenticated encryption, using the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm in the
Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) as defined in reference [4]. Additionally:
a) the key is 256 bits in total length;
b) the input initialization vector is 96 bits in total length, where all 96 bits are
transmitted in-line in the Initialization Vector field of the Security Header;
c) the output MAC is 128 bits in total length.
E1.2
SECURITY HEADER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Header of 14 octets in length. The format of the
Security Header is shown in figure E-1.
NOTES
1
GCM normally uses a simple incrementing counter as its initialization vector. A
separate anti-replay Sequence Number is unnecessary; therefore the Sequence
Number field shown in figure E-1 is zero octets in length. (See 4.1.1.3.)
2
GCM does not require padding; therefore the length of the Pad Length field shown in
figure E-1 is zero octets.
(bits)
INITIALIZATION VECTOR
SECURITY HEADER
96
SECURITY
PARAMETER
INDEX
16
PAD
LENGTH
0
SEQUENCE
NUMBER
0
Figure E-1: Security Header (TM Baseline)
E1.3
SECURITY TRAILER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Trailer of 16 octets in length. The format of the
Security Trailer is shown in figure E-2.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page E-2
July 2022
(bits)
SECURITY TRAILER
MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION CODE (MAC)
128
Figure E-2: Security Trailer (TM Baseline)
E1.4
AUTHENTICATION BIT MASK
The baseline implementation uses an authentication mask in which all of the mask bits
corresponding to Transfer Frame header fields not otherwise specified in 4.2.2.6.2 contain zeros.
E2
BASELINE MODE FOR USE WITH TC
E2.1
ALGORITHM
The baseline implementation to be used for interoperability testing and operation is
authentication, using the AES algorithm used in the Cipher-based Message Authentication
Code (CMAC) mode as defined in reference [4]. Additionally:
a) the key is 256 bits in total length;
b) the anti-replay sequence number is 32 bits in total length, where all 32 bits are
transmitted in-line in the Sequence Number field of the Security Header;
c) the output MAC is 128 bits in total length.
E2.2
SECURITY HEADER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Header of 6 octets in length. The format of the
Security Header is shown in figure E-3.
NOTE – The CMAC mode of operation performs no encryption and does not require an
initialization vector nor padding; therefore the length of the Initialization Vector
and Pad Length fields shown in figure E-3 are zero octets each.
(bits)
INITIALIZATION
VECTOR
SECURITY HEADER
0
SECURITY
PARAMETER
INDEX
16
PAD
LENGTH
0
SEQUENCE NUMBER
32
Figure E-3: Security Header (TC Baseline)
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page E-3
July 2022
E2.3
SECURITY TRAILER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Trailer of 16 octets in length. The format of the
Security Trailer is shown in figure E-4.
(bits)
SECURITY TRAILER
MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION CODE (MAC)
128
Figure E-4: Security Trailer (TC Baseline)
E2.4
AUTHENTICATION BIT MASK
The baseline implementation uses an authentication mask in which all of the mask bits
corresponding to Transfer Frame header fields not otherwise specified in 4.2.2.6.2 contain zeros.
E3
BASELINE MODE FOR USE WITH AOS
E3.1
ALGORITHM
The baseline implementation to be used for interoperability testing and operation is
authenticated encryption, using the AES algorithm used in the GCM as defined in
reference [4]. Additionally:
a) the key is 256 bits in total length;
b) the input initialization vector is 96 bits in total length, where all 96 bits are
transmitted in-line in the Initialization Vector field of the Security Header;
c) the output MAC is 128 bits in total length.
E3.2
SECURITY HEADER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Header of 14 octets in length. The format of the
Security Header is shown in figure E-5.
NOTES
1
GCM normally uses a simple incrementing counter as its initialization vector. A
separate anti-replay Sequence Number is unnecessary; therefore the Sequence
Number field shown in figure E-5 is zero octets in length. (See 4.1.1.3.)
2
GCM does not require padding; therefore the length of the Pad Length field shown in
figure E-5 is zero octets.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page E-4
July 2022
(bits)
INITIALIZATION VECTOR
SECURITY HEADER
96
SECURITY
PARAMETER
INDEX
16
PAD
LENGTH
0
SEQUENCE
NUMBER
0
Figure E-5: Security Header (AOS Baseline)
E3.3
SECURITY TRAILER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Trailer of 16 octets in length. The format of the
Security Trailer is shown in figure E-6.
(bits)
SECURITY TRAILER
MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION CODE (MAC)
128
Figure E-6: Security Trailer (AOS Baseline)
E3.4
AUTHENTICATION BIT MASK
The baseline implementation uses an authentication mask in which all of the mask bits
corresponding to Transfer Frame header fields not otherwise specified in 4.2.2.6.2 contain zeros.
E4
BASELINE MODE FOR USE WITH USLP
E4.1
ALGORITHM
The baseline implementation to be used for interoperability testing and operation is
authenticated encryption, using the AES algorithm used in the GCM as defined in
reference [4]. Additionally:
d) the key is 256 bits in total length;
e) the input initialization vector is 96 bits in total length, where all 96 bits are
transmitted in-line in the Initialization Vector field of the Security Header;
f) the output MAC is 128 bits in total length.
CCSDS RECOMMENDED STANDARD FOR SPACE DATA LINK SECURITY
CCSDS 355.0-B-2
Page E-5
July 2022
E4.2
SECURITY HEADER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Header of 14 octets in length. The format of the
Security Header is shown in figure E-7.
NOTES
1
GCM normally uses a simple incrementing counter as its initialization vector. A
separate anti-replay Sequence Number is unnecessary; therefore the Sequence
Number field shown in figure E-7 is zero octets in length. (See 4.1.1.3.)
2
GCM does not require padding; therefore the length of the Pad Length field shown in
figure E-7 is zero octets.
(bits)
INITIALIZATION VECTOR
SECURITY HEADER
96
SECURITY
PARAMETER
INDEX
16
PAD
LENGTH
0
SEQUENCE
NUMBER
0
Figure E-7: Security Header (USLP Baseline)
E4.3
SECURITY TRAILER
The baseline implementation uses a Security Trailer of 16 octets in length. The format of the
Security Trailer is shown in figure E-8.
(bits)
SECURITY TRAILER
MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION CODE (MAC)
128
Figure E-8: Security Trailer (USLP Baseline)
E4.4
AUTHENTICATION BIT MASK
The baseline implementation uses an authentication mask in which all of the mask bits
corresponding to Transfer Frame header fields not otherwise specified in 4.2.2.6.2 contain zeros.